# Important People/Events Mentioned:
- [[Russo-Georgian War(2008)]]
- [[Mikheil Saakashvili]]
- [[Dmitry Medvedev]]
- [[Vladimir Putin]]
- [[2008 Bucharest Summit]]
- [[Rose Revolution of Georgia]]
# Extra Information/External Sources:
Author: [[Ronald D. Asmus]]

[Speech by Condoleezza Rice condemning Russia in Georgia](https://2001-2009.state.gov/secretary/rm/2008/09/109954.htm)
[Human Rights Watch: Singled Out - Russia's Detention and Expulsion of Georgians, Oct 2007](https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/russia1007webwcover.pdf)
[Georgia: Economic development - The latest recipe for South Ossetian Peace, Feb 2007](https://reliefweb.int/report/georgia/georgia-economic-development-latest-recipe-south-ossetian-peace)
[Coordination of Cyber Attacks with the Ground War](https://web.archive.org/web/20100514112238/http://www.zdnet.com/blog/security/coordinated-russia-vs-georgia-cyber-attack-in-progress/1670)
[Neo-Eurasianism in Russian Foreign Policy](https://e-journal.unair.ac.id/JGS/article/view/7728/4577)
[Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security between NATO and the Russian Federation signed in Paris, France, 1997](https://www.nato.int/cps/su/natohq/official_texts_25468.htm)
[Putin's Speech at 2008 Bucharest Summit](https://www.unian.info/world/111033-text-of-putin-s-speech-at-nato-summit-bucharest-april-2-2008.html)

[[Russo-Georgian War(2008)]]

Possible cautionary note to self: This is a book from a US diplomat that primarily pushed for NATO expansion and EU acceptance of Georgia. As such, there is likely a large contingency of those who would discredit the historical usefulness of the book.
# Notes:
## Introduction
- The author tells us what he was doing during the outset of the war, and his initial reaction to the outbreak of conflict.
- He then makes a hard proclamation that the war was a direct message to not only the Georgians regarding their own sovereignty, but a message to the West, as Georgia had sought to integrate into the EU and potentially NATO. Russia, as a result of its geopolitical ambitions to hold onto the old sphere of influence, saw this as a chance to squash the idea within Georgia and others who could potentially harbor those thoughts.
- The author then criticizes Georgia, especially Saakashvili, for acting rashly in believing that it had the potential military might to go head to head with Russia. He does state that Georgia was essentially in a worse position than previous nations who wished to join Western groups, such as the EU, given that they shared a direct border with Russia, were geographically disconnected from the mainland of Europe, and that they had existing separatist factions that complicated the problem. Yet, a bad hand does not always equal poor play.
- There was also the fact that the West, which made overt signs of support for Georgia, did little to actually support them. Their efforts were for more centrally placed European nations, with Georgia receiving piecemeal concessions.
- Overall, the author hopes that his telling of the conflict will give people a reason to address the new Russia that is willing to assert itself both geopolitically and militarily within its immediate borders. Given the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, this may very well be true.
- There is a long portion devoted to the author's personal experiences regarding his diplomatic relationship with several leaders of Georgia, and the sentiment that he believed existed within the citizenry of the nation.
## Chapter 1: The Decision
- The author goes through many of the leadup pressures and fallouts that the Georgian president, Saakashvili, was experiencing in the weeks leading up to his decision to fire on South Ossetia on August 8.
- To begin with, much of the on-the-ground intelligence suggested that South Ossetian forces were increasing their military capability, and were becoming more aggressive in their operations. In addition, military forces that were definitively not part of the joint peace-keeping forces(JPKF) were beginning to be spotted and tracked. It was heavily denied by Russia, but it's now believed that these were Russian forces that were deploying prior to August 8.
- Diplomatic attempts were proving to not be effective, as Saakashvili was continually denied being able to speak to Russian statesmen, including the President Medvedev and diplomats from the European Union.
- Several specific events made Saakashvili believe that a ground war was imminent: The use of Russian aircraft and bombs to soften potential military targets in the week prior to 8 Aug, the Russian military drills that occurred just north of Georgia, and the mass exodus of South Ossetian civilians into Russian controlled North Ossetia.
- Saakashvili, on 7 Aug, met with members of the Georgian National Security Council(NSC) to determine the situation. It was unilaterally agreed that the situation had escalated into a probable invasion situation, and that Russia was responsible for the situation becoming what it was.
- On 7 Aug, communication between South Ossetia and Russia ceased, and Saakashvili dispatched Yakobashvili, a Georgian special envoy, to discuss the situation with Kulakhmetov, the head of the JPKF. According to Yakobashvili, Kulashmetov confirmed that his positions were being utilized by South Ossetian forces, and that they were no longer responding to him as commander. To Saakashvili, this almost certainly confirmed that Russia had begun to take command of the situation, and were directing local separatist groups to militarily harass Georgia, in a potential preparation for invasion. It was suggested that the best course of action was to call a ceasefire, and hope that it stayed.
- Yakobashvili, at 18:40, held a press conference to announce a ceasefire, followed by Saakashvili repeating the message around 19:10. The hope was, given the inability to communicate with leaders from either South Ossetia or Russia, that the message would be conveyed through the media.
- At 23:00, shelling resumed from the South Ossetian forces. Saakashvili, hoping to keep the situation contained, told his Defense Minister "Do not respond". At 23:30, it was reported that Russian forces had moved through the Roki Tunnel into South Ossetia, and Saakashvili ordered for his troops to respond to what he now believed to be an invasion.
- This decision has been roundly criticized throughout the international community, and is believed to have potentially violated international law. Asmus's argument is that, given the situation on the ground, it was one of the only reasonable actions that Saakashvili saw possible. The situation overall could have gone two ways: pre-empt the invasion with a show of force, or decide on defending from a "slow" invasion.
- Many of Russia's claims of casus belli did not hold up to scrutiny after the fact, including that they were defending from a genocide, or that they wished to protect Russian citizens. No evidence of genocide was found by fact-finding missions. And Russia's aggressive passport campaign was regarded as a violation of international law, as it interfered with Georgia's sovereignty.
- The biggest claim by Russia was the death of Russian peacekeepers. Yet, there are questions as to whether the PKF was no longer neutral. Some believe that they began to act as cover for South Ossetian forces, and had become a de facto extension of Russia's forces. In addition, the first Russian peacekeepers to have died during the conflict happened after ground troops had been deployed, possibly removing their status as unaffiliated forces, as it was believed that they positioned themselves as combatants set against Georgia.
- Asmus then goes through the claim of indiscriminate shelling, leading to attacks against civilian targets and the inordinate loss of civilian life. According to him, none of the evidence supports the claim. He even hints that this may have been a tactical ploy to move investigations away from the ethnic cleansing that occurred in South Ossetia.
- While Saakashvili's decision was widely criticized, his reasoning was that to wait would be to put his citizens in danger. As president, he had the responsibility to lessen the potential harm to his people as much as he could, and so he chose the more aggressive action in an effort to stave off potential conflict. He also believed that his government would have removed him from office for just standing by and letting Russia invade with no challenge, and that it would result in a more Pro-Russian president to take his place.
## Chapter 2: From Cold to Hot War in the Caucasus
- Here, the author is focusing on the historical significance of Georgia within a wider historical and geopolitical context.
- To begin with, the region of Georgia has a long history of being both independent and subjugated by Russia. Originally, the territory was fought over by the Ottomans, Qajar Iran, and the Russian Empire. The Russians eventually took them over in 1801. They persisted as a part of the Russian Empire until World War 1, where they achieved a short 3 years of independence until the Bolsheviks took them back over in 1921. It wasn't until the 1980s that Georgia saw another opportunity for independence during the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
- For the most part, the author says that understanding this history is not too important for understanding the 2008 conflict itself. While this backdrop helps explain some of the conflict between Georgia, South Ossetia, and Abkhazia, it does almost nothing to explain Moscow's motivations.
- For the most part, the most significant event for the lead-up to the Russo-Georgian War was, according to the author, the Rose Revolution of 2003, which made Saakashvili the leader of Georgia. The biggest change was the reorientation of many of Georgia's policies to become a more West state that sought to join the EU and NATO, which was directly opposed to many of the policy hopes of Russia in the Caucasus.
- There is a brief history of the Georgian wars in the 1990s, where newly gained Georgian independence resulted in a precarious political situation between Georgia, South Ossetia, and Abkhazia. For the most part, Georgia rode off of a newly found nationalist sentiment that did not work well with the other ethnic groups in the region, and resulted in multiple wars between the newly formed region.
- Many of these conflicts were monitored and assisted by Russian forces among the separatist groups within South Ossetia and Abkhazia, which led to worsening ties between the new Russian Federation and Georgia. The biggest contributor was how much they had affected the local populace, both in terms of casualties and the displacement of citizens and ethnic groups.
- Immediately in the aftermath of the wars in the 90s, Russia was given the role of peacekeeping the region, with a total of 3000 troops allowed in Abkhazia, and a JPKF to be formed in South Ossetia that would have Russian, Ossetian, and Georgian forces under the command of Russia. The author argues that this unilateral control given to Russia was a destabilizing factor in the region, as Russia had shown clear political, if not territorial, intent within the region.
- Russia was also the main arbitrator for negotiation and peace settlement, giving them an unfair advantage in pressuring Georgia within the international community. This meant that most appeals towards the wider international community would often route back to Russia for final decisions.
- Many of the initial moves made by the post-Soviet government of Russia extended a policy of peace to the region. Yet, the Rose and Orange revolutions started to sour the relationship between Russia and the rest of the world, which were successful portions of the wider "colour revolutions" that had been occurring within the previous Soviet bloc nations.
- Supposedly, according to the author, Putin would often become quite irate when the topic of Georgia would be brought up, and the relationship between the leaders of the countries were quite contentious.
- The book then references a report by the Human Rights Watch organization which documents the retaliatory actions taken by Russia against ethnic Georgians as a result of the rising tensions. Found above in [[A Little War That Shook the World(RGW08)#Extra Information/External Sources]].
- The author asserts that several key political figures within the South Ossetia and Abkhazia, including intelligence officers and military personnel, were eventually replaced by Kremlin picks, which pushed the region towards destabilization and opted to work with Russia over Georgia for economic and political agreements.
- The strategy of bolstering Russian numbers through passports again appears. Some further reading finds that the same strategy, which is intended to bolster the claim of defending Russian citizens, [is being applied within occupied territories of Ukraine as well](https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/ukrainians-forced-become-russian-citizens-us-backed-research-finds-2023-08-02/). [An additional report by HRW](https://www.hrw.org/news/2023/05/16/russia-threatens-ukrainians-who-refuse-russian-citizenship).
- A primary goal of Saakashvili's was the possible reunification of Georgia as a whole, including the areas under separatist rule. Originally, this was attempted utilizing economic deals, and moves towards regional autonomy for the contested areas, as long as they worked with Georgia as a whole, rather than divided, nation. Western forces would usually tell Saakashvili that focusing on this issue was the incorrect approach. Unfortunately, for both Saakashvili and outsiders, this was a rather popular issue within Georgia overall.
- There was also the buildup of Georgian forces, as both a response to the wars of the 90s and the growing international pressure from Russia. This led to increased spending and focus on the police and armed forces, which would often confuse outsiders as to whether Saakashvili was truly pursuing a policy of peaceful reunification through policy, or if he was really setting up for a conquest.
- Unfortunately, this also resulted in the region becoming somewhat standoffish, as South Ossetia and Abkhazia took this as a sign to further rely on Russia as a potential partner.
- Though, the situation at home and abroad made it quite clear that the military option was both not a popular option, nor was it particularly viable as a means of securing the region. Okruashvili, the most hawkism minister of Georgia, was ousted from the nation in 2006, signaling that the strategy had waned internally well before the 2008 August War.
- From 2006 on, the main Georgian strategy of dealing with the separatist regions was to promote economic growth within Georgia, and introduce several benefits to citizens of the contested regions, including access to recreational facilities and medical clinics. The overall idea, called project Sanakoyev, was to promote stronger economic ties and stability within the region. And article detailing some aspects of the project are in [[A Little War That Shook the World(RGW08)#Extra Information/External Sources]].
- Overall, Russia did not respond well to the new developments, and it is believed that they even took steps to sabotage the overall plans of Georgia at the time, mostly by shoring up the support and position of Koikoty, the separatist ruler in charge of South Ossetia, who was believed to be installed by Russia. In addition the situation in Abkhazia didn't have any good avenues of approach, and little to no progress appeared possible within the region.
## Chapter 3: The Kosovo Precedent
- While the Bucharest Summit played one part in upsetting Moscow's position, the other major event within the international sphere was the recognition of Kosovo as an independent state.
- The biggest mistake made, specifically by the US and EU, was to not properly assess the response by Russia, and thus they did not prepare a robust response to the situation in the Caucasus, which Russia used as a response.
- For the most part, the problem was what appeared to Russia to be a unilateral movement by NATO to impose itself on the conflict within Serbia. This, coupled with Russia's inherent distrust of the US's intentions, solidified for them that they, and their previous allies, were simply on the chopping block for NATO.
- The actual reality of Kosovo was far more complex than that, however. It was a region that was mired in ethnic cleansing that was bordering on genocide, and international pressure built for other nations to intervene at some level. With some reluctance, Russia assisted in NATO efforts to quell the situation.
- As a result, the Serbians, who felt like they got the bad end of the international deal regarding Kosovo, turned to Russia for support. In many ways, this turned out to be the prototype run of much of Russia's international policy moving forward.
- There are plenty of commentators that attempt to make comparisons to Abkhazia and Kosovo, and it's a comparison that Russia will often make, but the conditions, both politically and materially, do not appear to properly line up.
- The main problem with the international communities response to Georgia is that they left much of the observation and peacekeeping efforts to Russia, who had a stake in the outcome of the conflict, particularly against Georgia. 
- Russia was not silent about how it would respond to Kosovo, and it made itself very clear that it would retaliate by acknowledging the Abkhazian and South Ossetian regions as independent. For the most part, the international community saw this as a bluff, and decided to move forward on Kosovo independence.
- A rough transcript of a conversation had between Putin and Saakashvili is written down, showing that Putin was well aware of how this would harm Georgia's ambitions, but that he felt that he needed to make a statement to the world.
## Chapter 4: Diplomatic Shootout in Bucharest
- It was closely after Kosovo that the Bucharest Summit was held, in which overt moves were made that states such as Georgia or Ukraine would be considered in the future for NATO membership. To Russia, this solidified the fears the Kosovo had put in place of an encroaching NATO and US expansion that would eventually turn itself towards Russia and its sovereignty.
- One of the main sticking points was that Albania was granted a Membership Action Plan(MAP) for joining NATO, while it was still resolving the crisis regarding Kosovo. To Georgia and Ukraine, this signaled that NATO membership was more politically decided than anything else. To Russia, this meant that the rules regarding membership were easy to bend, and that the promises to Ukraine and Georgia could quickly turn into action.
- A divide occurred internally within NATO regarding the decisions of Ukraine and Georgia. To begin with, it was still unclear whether they passed the bar for potential NATO membership. Secondly, the precarious situation with Russia provided a pause for consideration among several member states. In a worst case scenario, admitting a state like Georgia could pull the EU and US into a conflict within the Caucasus, which was not ideal for many of the member states.
- Much of this came as a fallout of the US policy regarding Iraq within the early 2000s. Germany in particular was critical of the US within the international stage, and it was more focused on securing a good relationship with Russia as part of its wider foreign policy.
- The two biggest holdouts were essentially Germany and France, though Sarkozy, the president of France at the time, was more trying to keep a good balance with Germany than anything else. In essence, if Germany could be convinced to extend the MAP to Georgia, then it would have likely happened.
- The largest proponent was Bush, who essentially spent his last year in office attempting to get both Ukraine and Georgia on MAP, mostly because he believed that it would be the most beneficial move for either moving forward.
- Much of the chapter is detailed notes of what happened behind closed doors, and the strategies employed by those who were both for and against MAP for Ukraine and Georgia.
## Chapter 5: Diplomacy Fails
- The majority of this chapter details the diplomatic measures that were proposed and attempted as a way to stymie the possibility of war outbreaking. Immediately after the Kosovo independence and Bucharest summit, Moscow made overt moves to strengthen their hold on the Abkhaz and South Ossetian regions, mostly by removing decrees of shipping weapons, declaring them as independent states, and making public promises to provide military assistance to them in the chances of war. Meanwhile, they increased their military presence in the region, and conducted several covert moves to better secure their military position, such as striking down Georgian UAVs and rebuilding infrastructure to assist in troop mobilization.
- Part of the wider strategy of Russia was the continual move to claim that Georgia was preparing for military action itself, and that much of what they were doing was to prevent Georgia from grabbing territory. This appears to have worked quite well, as there were those within the international sphere that saw Saakashvili as a potential hothead that would make the region unstable. 
- Meanwhile, Georgia felt more and more pressure building as a result of what they were now believing to be an inevitable invasion from Russia. The heads of state were split between attempting more diplomatic routes, or possibly looking into a small military operation to discourage the buildup of forces and pressure from Russian diplomats. Georgia's allies adamantly pushed back against any military action, stating that they would not receive any help from the West if such actions were taken. Unfortunately for Georgia, their options were being more and more limited as time went on.
- The US approach to the problem was essentially to ask for more international watchers and peacekeepers to be brought into the area, mostly to calm down either side. The EU was far more lenient, and asked for Georgia to a non-use-of-force pledge, while also increasing the number of diplomatic meetings and ties. The US reluctantly went with the EU plan. Georgia, however, saw this as essentially capitulating to Moscow.
- While much of this was being negotiated, diplomacy between Russia, Georgia, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia continued to worsen. Georgia proposed multiple plans, including several that were quite favorable to Moscow's original demands. Yet, Russian diplomats continued to stall and move forward with nothing. This was a frustration that the US diplomats were experiencing as well, as Russia would continue to make non-committal assertions, while also backing out of any potential diplomacy.
- Eventually, a plan was decided, Georgia would make a strong commitment to non-use-of-force, and meetings between Russia and Georgia would be held, with the US and EU providing mediation. Unfortunately, those meetings never manifested, as the crisis boiled over shortly after.
## Chapter 6: The Battle
- One of the more interesting elements of the contingency plans that Georgia had was the assumption that the majority of a conflict would occur along the border of Abkhazia, which was a more desirable target overall, given its access to the Black Sea and those trade routes. When much of the fighting started in South Ossetia, this was a surprise to Georgians, which had little planning around a conflict within that region.
- Much of the chapter is focused on the on-the-ground decision making regarding how Georgia handled the operation, and the rapid changes that happened both within the conflict and internationally.
- The biggest takeaway is the fear that the US felt in attempting to respond to the conflict. If too hard a stance was taken, then it could lead to an escalation of the war into a more international conflict, including potential targets in Crimea or the wider Balkans. If too soft a stance was taken, then it could very well be that the government of Georgia would be toppled and replaced, which mirrored concerns of what happened in Chechnya. In the end, the US attempted every diplomatic route possible to end the war, including strong condemnations of Russia and providing humanitarian aid.
- Not much is written about the European response, except that the US hoped that the EU would take point in affairs, so as to avoid more direct confrontations between the US and Russia.
- Towards the end of the conflict, many of the central staff of Georgia believed that their nation was done for, and Tbilisi would be invaded. Yet, that ultimately did not happen.
## Chapter 7: Ceasefire
- Here, we get a more in-depth explanation of the mechanisms and factors that were going into the European side of the overall international front, largely from the perspective of France, as they were were the head of NATO at the time.
- When initial talks between Sarkozy and Putin yielded no fruit, Sarkozy moved to speaking with Medvedev, the then current President of Russia, who appeared to be more amicable to a ceasefire and return to status quo.
- Initial talks between diplomats and Georgia began when Sarkozy returned to France, with them establishing preliminary agreements to a ceasefire from Saakashvili. Sarkozy, upon arriving in Russia, decided to ignore this initial draft, as he believed anything from Saakashvili, who he believed was responsible for the start of the conflict, would be a non-starter.
- Eventually, Sarkozy was able to meet with Medvedev and Putin, proposing their own draft for a potential ceasefire. This was rejected rather quickly, and the security advisors met together to propose a new draft. After some time, and no progress, Sarkozy proposed his own draft.
- While the Russians agreed to the Sarkozy rough draft, the response from Georgia and the international community was much more tepid, as much of the language of the ceasefire agreement was ambiguous and did not properly establish hard lines or dates for any of the involved parties to follow.
- Additional papers and expansions have been made since the original agreement, with Georgia explicitly fighting for recognition of territorial integrity, which was not in the initial draft. Thankfully, Medvedev agreed to remove "status" from the last point, giving Georgia more wiggle room in future negotiations regarding agreements and deals between Georgia, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia.
- While a ceasefire had been established, the ambiguity of the initial agreement left Georgia in a precarious situation in the following weeks, with negotiations regarding Russian security forces becoming a sticking point. To this day, Russian forces still occupy both South Ossetia and Abkhazia, while Russia claims them as independent states, citing Kosovo as a precedent.
## Chapter 8: Georgia, Russia, and the Future of the West
- This chapter is where much of Asmus' argument regarding the Georgian war is laid out.
- First, while the ethnic problems and national lines within Georgia have been, and continue to be, a major hurdle for the wider Georgian nation to figure out, it was not the primary conflict playing out in 2008. Instead, the ethnic conflict was co-opted and used as cover for Russian interests within the region.
- It is also incorrect to believe that this was simply a war of Russia vs Georgia. Instead, Asmus argues that the true target of the war was the wider European and Western movement, with Georgia serving as Russia's example to the world for what they were both capable of, and what they were willing to do.
- Asmus believes that this was a failure in two major parts: The West and their inability to assist an ally, and Russia's renewed Eurasian approach to politics.
- The West, and especially Europe, were too afraid of upsetting Russia to dedicate themselves to proper action, which they had done previously in the Balkan region during the Kosovo crisis. As such, much of their focus was on not upsetting the new precarious balance with a more cooperative Russia, potentially reigniting the Cold War. Unfortunately, this meant sitting back too much as Russia began to adopt a more stringent policy of Eurasianism.
- Russia, meanwhile, had decided to essentially unwind much of the previous work that they had accomplished over the past decade, where cooperation and communication with Europe and the US was beginning to produce real benefits. Instead, by falling back on old principles of Spheres of Influence control, Russia began to shut itself off from the world and make itself the sole proprietor of Eurasia as a whole. In terms of international stability, this, Asmus argues, is an incredibly dangerous position, especially for the previous Soviet states in Eastern Europe.
- Overall, Asmus argues that, moving forward, the US and Europe need to learn the mistakes from Georgia. They should not attempt to appease Russia to the same degree as they did with Georgia, and they need to be more firm in supporting potential allies within the region. Otherwise, Asmus fears a return to many of the bloody politics of the early 20th century.
# Notable Quotes
## Introduction
