# Information
# Key Takeaway
# Notes
### Chapter 1: Intro
- A large focus of this book, according to the author, is the shift in people's experience with massive amounts of death, directly as a result of the increase in technological prowess of fighting nations. Some numbers are given of several previous wars, showing the massive spike in deaths from WW1, the main focus.
- The realities of trench warfare introduced new confrontations of death among millions along the front lines. Isolation of squads, snipers, and the charges all made death persistent. 
- An interesting development was the mixture of pride and mourning that was found in those who participated in the war. There was a sense of national duty and comradery that was mixed with the terrible sense of loss.
- Mosses states that this created the Myth of the War Experience, which sanctified the war as a symbol of national pride, with fallen soldiers especially upheld to be the symbols of that pride. 
- Many of these attitudes came not only from those on the homefront, but would often be exemplified by those who participated in the wars, usually through their writings of first-hand experience. Typically, these would come from volunteer soldiers, who were already primed to believe in the cause.
- While WW1 was the height of the Myth of the War Experience(MWE), the first portions of the book will look at the foundations laid down by previous conflicts, mostly in the French Revolution and German Wars of Liberation against Napoleon. Then, the book will focus on WW1 as the height of the MWE creation, and continue towards WW2 to see it's continuation for national identity and pride.
## Part 1: Foundations
### Chapter 2: Volunteers in War
- The volunteers for the Revolutionary Army of France grew at an astonishing rate in 1792, with most seemingly coming from upper-middle class families. In 1793, conscription was put into place, and it was more difficult to keep them interested in joining, as draft evasion and desertion rose.
- There became a general myth of volunteer soldiers as typically patriotic and excitable middle-class, educated citizens of a nation, in comparison to legions made with mercenaries, vagabonds, and destitute conscripts.
- The rise of citizen-soldiers began to change the outlook many had regarding the profession of soldier, as it was now seen as an occupation of potential neighbors who held their nation in high regard.
- An additional factor was the interconnection between the ideals of the soldiers and their acknowledgement by the state. Prior, soldiers fought mostly for the pay. The French Revolution had soldiers who fought for ideals and symbols. Equally, these soldiers started to become symbols themselves, with the French Republic era integrating soldiers into festivals and customs, as a way to represent the state.
- This became especially prevalent in the German wars for Liberation against Napoleon, where a large group of volunteer soldiers rose up for a mixture of reasons, including the idea of German unity and strength, and the concept of the "Volk's soul"
- A large method of this energy and myth was found in the outpouring and elevation of poetry and music that perpetuated the bravery and commitment of the citizen-army, with much of this becoming part of the national identity, and some being adopted into national anthems.
- A persistent theme throughout many of these writings was the sense of comradery, as soldiers were now being displayed as brothers-in-arms, or as equal citizens from the same nation.
- Though, desertion from the Free Corps, the volunteers of the Prussia/German forces, was actually quite high, as many found it unpalatable to their sense of heroism and bravery.
- Still, the myth persisted, as images of a band of brothers was formed around the Free Corps and other volunteer groups, with many of them gaining recognition from their governments as vital pieces of the military.
- Several other factors, such as the rise of "manliness" and freedom as values, led into the concept of the citizen-soldier being elevated as an ideal for young men during the time.
- Mosse does state that volunteer soldiers existed in every conflict throughout the 19th century, but that not all of them contributed to the MWE, including the English Volunteer Force. The biggest factor appears to be the presence of Romanticized idealisms and national pride alongside the usage of volunteer forces, such as in France and Germany.
- An example is made of the Greek War of Independence(1821-1831) on how the romanticization of war is mixed with national feelings, in that the ancient ideas of Greek culture mixed with the sense of reclaiming that which was wholly European from the Turks.
- There was also the addition of exoticism mixed with foreign travel in the Greek War, as many coming from outside Greece saw it as a way to "see the world", and to play a pivotal role in what was shaping up to be a historic war.
### Chapter 3: Building the Myth: Tangible Symbols of Death
- With the usage of Christian symbols and nomenclature to capture the essence of the war, Germany's war against Napoleon took on a sanctified, religious fervor to it.
- The full extension of this came with what Mosse calls the "Cult of the fallen soldier", in which the death of these soldiers was placed at a higher moral level, essentially acting as martyrs for the cause.
- Festivals, ceremonies, and commemorations began which exalted and symbolized the dead who had sacrificed themselves for the wider cause.
- It was generally after the French revolution that soldiers were treated equally in death, as previous wars usually separated the officers and the common rank.
- There is some commentary about how burial practices overall shifted within the era, in that specifically the idea of sanitation led to more burials outside of municipals than within, which led to further credence to the concept of ideas
- Generally, a lot of this is arguing towards the idea that the concept of death itself was being more and more removed from people's average lives. Cemeteries were being moved away from populaces, and people's interactions with death itself was being moved more towards the ceremonial aspects of death, including elaborate funerals and graves, more so than actually confronting death.
- A large portion of this was the movement of death towards "natural" settings, in which the death was not viewed as a fact of human life, but as a part of nature itself.
- War memorials were a regular part of previous life, with many nations dedicating their war efforts into monuments towards typically generals and officers. These would often take the shape of fantastic figures as statues or as classical objects, such as an obelisk.
- Finally, there is a note regarding the link between Christianity and individual death, and how these would be interconnected through various religious holidays, such as Easter or Good Friday.
## Part 2: The First World War
### Chapter 4: Youth and the War Experience
- While there are some parallels to the previous wars, and the youthful vigor in which volunteers joined up, there are some variations that occurred as a result of the difference in time and scale from the previous generations.
- The rapid change in technology led to a new modern sense of rapidity in both time and space among the populace, including the speed of communication and travel closing vast differences unlike previous generations. The youth especially took to these new innovations as both a method forwards and as an expression of their energy as frantic lifestyles.
- War appeared to be a perfect outlet for much of these ideas, especially the youth. It was treated almost as a festive event in which the boredom of typical life was wholeheartedly thrust into the rapid modern age.
- It was also seen as a way of finding oneself and the "common man", which would go on to shape society into the greater hopeful vision. It was a crucible that would hopefully reshape them into the men they imagined they could be.
- There was a regular theme of manliness that played a role in much of these images. Though it was shaped differently depending on where it came from, there was a regular association made between war as both a game and test of manliness.
- Mixed with this was a sudden rise in national identity and patriotism, especially within the August days of WW1. It was a powerful feeling of unity and energy that permeated much of the populace, even reluctant pacifists.
- Much of this was equally perpetuated throughout the war, as many of the educated youth who volunteered were also the ones producing first hand accounts of the war, many of which would hold positive views on comradery and the manliness of being a soldier.
### Chapter 5: The Cult of the Fallen Soldier
- Using the example of a bulletin put forward by Germany during the early days of the war, Mosse switches a bit to the homefront of much of these myths. In particular, while troops were becoming disillusioned with war on the front, there was a considerable amount of focus placed by academics and politicians on the fallen youth of battle as symbols of martyrdom and sacrifice for a great national effort.
- Mosse goes through a variety of examples of how Christian themes and symbols began to be used as both a way of deifying the dead and justifying the war effort. Christian suffering was re-elevated as a virtue, and the dead were praised as somewhat saintly figures that exemplified the core values of "the Passion of Christ".
- There was also the collectivizing power of using the fallen as a group of national identity. All soldiers were thrust under the single label of those who sacrificed, transforming a large portion of citizens into a great symbol for the bravery and manliness of the soldiers and the nation.
- The second portion of this chapter focuses heavily on the minute details of how war cemeteries were formed, and many of the ideas behind them. Much of it is to reiterate the overall point of how nations adapted to mass death, and the particular symbols used by each to either lessen the sting, or elevate the fallen, typically both.
- The height of this sort of symbolic burial was with the tomb of the unknown soldier, where all fallen soldiers were essentially placed into the image of one soldier that was exhumed and chosen at essentially random. Typically, these were also placed at locations which spurred on national pride and symbolism, such as the Arc de Triomphe.
- There was also the creation of many war memorials, which sought to honor the dead through various means. Some were more local, while some national, but many sought to bring the dead together in remembrance.
### Chapter 6: The Appropriation of Nature
- The focus of this chapter is entirely upon the idea of, well, appropriating nature to further the idea of the MWE, in which there is both a reclamation of old values, and a simultaneous rejection of new values into the future.
- There is also the recurrence of the theme of rebirth and resurrection, which has appeared within previous chapters, and has been a central theme of the book overall. Soldiers are not seen as fully dead, but rather as reborn figures of either cultural or spiritual significance.
- There was also the reclaiming of the battlefield by nature, which was both lamented and praised by either side. Cities were rebuilt, and landscapes grew back. This was both a loss of memory, but also tied into the rebirth of the land and people
- There is a long section regarding the symbolism and utility of the mountain for both individualism and nationalism, and how the image changed over time. A large part of it is the view of the mountain as escaping modern ideas and technology in some capacity.