PDF link: https://web.archive.org/web/20180410110028id_/http://art.yale.edu/file_columns/0000/1474/homo_ludens_johan_huizinga_routledge_1949_.pdf
(Important Note: The title is translated as the Play-Element *in* Culture, but Huizinga was very clear that he wanted it translated as the Play-Element *of* Culture.)

Wiki Link for overview: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homo_Ludens
### Chapter Notes:

#### Foreword:
- Commentary on the idea of Homo Sapiens and Homo Faber, and then adds that Homo Ludens should be considered.
- Specifies that he is not talking about the Play Element "in" Culture, but the Play Element "of" Culture, specifying that the Genitive case best describes the relationship between Play and Culture.

#### I Nature and Significance of Play as a Cultural Phenomenon:
- Play predates and exists outside of culture, as it appears within animal behavior with no need for humans to introduce the behavior to them. Because of this, it is something more fundamental than culture.
- Explaining play as merely a physiological or psychological phenomenon is missing the significance of play as a function within behavior overall.
- While Huizinga doesn't dismiss these explanations of play, he finds the relationship a bit backwards. Specifically, these explanations try to explain play as fulfilling something that is not play itself, but is rather directed towards some end goal or purpose that is either social or biological. Yet, they don't answer what play is itself, and how it can be defined.
- Fundamentally, no one has a good enough answer for why play is "fun", and how it appears to fulfill that drive within humans. It's a total concept that can't be explained by deriving it towards other functions.
- Huizinga makes the argument that play is beyond rationalism, meaning mind separate from body, as it is irrational.
- According to Huizinga, Language and myth-making are products of play, and not the other way around. The need to describe, to modify, in other words, to play with ideas and concepts explains the growth of language, and the mythologizing of various portions of reality.
- Reference is made to the Aristotelian *animal ridens*, in which Aristotle makes the distinction of laughter for why humans are different from animals.
- Huizinga makes arguments towards how play is not in contention with the concept of seriousness. Rather, serious play is a common idea, while there are other non-serious acts that can not be directly called play, such as comedy.
- The first quality of play denoted by Huizinga is that play is freedom in some metaphysical sense. The second is that it is a stepping out from "real" life and exists in its own sphere. [[Homo Ludens by Johan Huizinga#^FirstQualities]]
- The third element of play is its distinctiveness from "ordinary" life, as a secluded form. It is distinct from life, but it leaves memories and ideas that form tradition and cultural phenomenons.
- Play transcends into ritual, but there is question about how.
- Sacred ritual, Huizinga argues, is another form of play. It is serious, just like other forms of play, but it transports its participants to another world, is played by distinct and iron-clad rules, and elevates its players into a realm of "freedom". It has all the hallmarks of play, even if it is not recognized as such.
- Overall, it appears that the first section was to address the link between play and ritual, especially religious and ancient ritual. I'm assuming that the remaining sections pull this out into other sectors of life. The next section is on Language.

#### II The Play-Concept as Expressed in Language:
- Huizinga states that the baseline for the play-concept is closest to what is defined by "play" in English, which corresponds to the concept in other modern European languages. A definition is then laid out, with some examples.
- Huizinga then lays out that there are differences in how various languages encapsulate the concept of play, and that the linguistic development of these denote something more fundamental.
- He begins with Greek, where several aspects of the play-concept is split among different words with different etymologies. There is the concept for childish playing, and for contests.
- He brings up how other thinkers, namely "Professor Bolkestein", see this separation in Greek language as a fundamental contention to Huizinga's idea that contests and competition is linked to play, and that Huizinga is conflating two different ideas.
- Huizinga's response is to state that the separation of the words themselves are not sufficient enough reason to believe that the fundamental core of each is not connected in some way, and that the play-concept underlies both, rather than be separate.
- He continues to state that the Greeks had developed their rituals and contests to such a degree that they had begun to separate the concept from the fundamental core of the play-element, and thus developed the separation in language as a consequence.
- Huizinga then moves onto the play-concept as expressed in Sanskrit, and the four different words relate to the original concept, with some etymological examination to find commonalities.
- Then comes Chinese, where there are two different words that capture a similar divide as the Greeks, but with differing connotations.
- Finally is Blackfoot, a tribe of the Algonkin, and how they similarly separate out contests and child's play, though with slight differences in usage.
- Huizinga then doubles back to Bolkestein, in which he says that the Greek separation is not unique to the language, but appears to be within various, disconnected languages. As such, the mere separation of language is not sufficient to argue that it properly disconnects the two concepts.
- Huizinga then goes through Japanese, Semitic languages, and finally Latin. Of particular note is Latin, and how it separates out *ludus*(To play) from *jocus*(To joke/jest). Later Romance languages have adopted the latter to assume both(*jouer, juegar, jogar, giocare*), and *ludus* has disappeared as a word, even if the concept continues.
- What follows is the Germanic addition to the pool, where it had the broadest usage of the play-concept within language. The same branch of words could mean a variety of play activities.
- Then comes the English etymology of the word play, and how it's borrowed from several different sources, especially Anglo-Saxon.
- Huizinga then connects the linguistic play-concept to the linguistic contest-concept, demonstrating through several tales and songs that the words for play, battle, and contest tend to intermingle in usage.
- Huizinga then denotes two uses of play within language that appear to not fully encapsulate the play-concept, but can fall into it:
	- Music, in the sense of playing an instrument and of being a separate magic circle of being, can fall into the play-concept, but is not entirely within it, as other musical acts, such as singing, may not be fully captured by the linguistics of "play". One does not "play" their own voice, so to speak.
	- Romance by itself may fall into the usage of play in language, but the act of copulation itself falls out of it. Typically, the idea of play appears in romantic or sexual acts that are outside the norm, rather than the norm. One is "playing around" when they cheat, or they would be a "player" if they ignore typical courting norms.
- Finally, Huizinga notes that the language of play appears to be quite robust, while there is no simple word for the opposite of play. Tying back to the idea of seriousness, there is the word "earnest", which can denote that one is fervently working or focusing without play. Yet, play can be serious, so the presence of seriousness does not undermine the play-concept itself. Rather, seriousness can exist outside of play or within play. The lack of proper language to denote "not play" suggests the fundamental nature of the play-concept within culture.

#### III Play and Contest as Civilizing Functions:
- Huizinga makes it a point to state that it should be understood that he is not arguing that culture originated in play, nor that civilization came from play. Rather, it is all play at its core. Culture is play, and civilization is play.
- While much of the play-concept becomes abstracted within culture, usually through ritual and competition, it often finds itself reasserting its form when it comes to the more formal acts of culture, such as in festivals, dances, performances, and the such.
- Objectively, a result of a game or a contest is almost meaningless, yet it is treated with all seriousness. People still treat the completion of a game or contest as a great feat, even if little has changed in the world.
- As an example, the outcome of a game of chess is, almost entirely, meaningless outside of the chess game itself. Yet, winning is still held as valuable in its own right, and may confer meaning to not only the player, but to the group they belong. Winning, even if materially meaningless, holds value.
- There are also old ideas of "fair play" that do not appear to be congruent with our modern ideas. In various myths, heroes would win athletic contests by trickery or assistance from others. The value of winning, even by cheating, was respected moreso than "fair play".
- Rituals and ceremonies demonstrate the concept of a dualism of the cosmos within the anthropological record, such as the concept of *yin* and *yang*. These opposing forces are often seen as competing forces, and formulate concepts of the world and balance. Once again, at the core is the play-concept, of all of life in competition, seeking to win.
- Early conceptions of statehood built upon these contest models, in which the ruling tribe would place themselves as against those not of their tribe, effectively mythologizing and ritualizing the concept of those who were part of "civilization" and those who opposed it.
- Huizinga gives a detailed description of the *potlatch*, which is [a ritual perpetuated by Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potlatch) and how it relates to competition.
- The general principle that Huizinga extracts from the potlatch is the superiority displayed by participating within the ritual of giving away or destroying one's own wealth, and that it incurs a challenge to their opponent, by showing how much one can give up and still live. He then goes through other stories and rituals where the same principle happens.
	- At its core, the idea is that the honor and glory of winning is more valuable than material possessions, and the behavior appears enough within anthropology that we can not say it is a small facet of human life.
- Virtue, as a concept, continually finds itself tied to values which are generally tied towards better outcomes in various contests, whether that be militarily, socially, economically, or politically. Virtues like courage, strength, morality, justice, and honor are applicable both in and out of various forms of contest.
- The concept of Nobility, throughout multiple cultures, codifies several aspects of these virtues into an entire class of people, and will often reinvigorate their image of Nobility through various festivals, contests, and feats. In other words, the Noble are those who make winning an art form.
- As an evolution of this nobility was the movement of contest into other forms, such as the use of overt politeness in China, of satire in Greece, or of bragging in Norse legend. One sought to gain the upper hand over a potential rival by showing how one was "more noble", and thus creating a new field for contests in nobility overall.
- Huizinga then speaks of Jacob Burckhardt and his contributions to the defining of the agonal spirit of Greece. Specifically, Huizinga believes that Burckhardt had unfairly contained the agonistic qualities of Greek civilization to a small portion of Greek history, and not relevant to the remainder of Hellenistic Greece or to other civilizations.
- He then moves on to address other thoughts by writers that were following Burckhardt's ideas, going through each to refute the central misconception in associating agonistic culture.
- In summary, many of the elements of the play-concept are found in competition. At first, they are ways of understanding the world, usually as competing forces of nature. Over time, these give rise to ritual, ceremony, and contests, typically around early concepts of a people or a state. Within these, the drive towards victory, to secure honor and glory as victor, begins to drive the valuation of those who win and those who don't, leading to moral underpinnings and the rise of nobility. Further complexity is added as further significance, rules, and rituals are added to each layer, leading towards modern civilizations.

#### IV Play and Law:
- While the typical view of law is a matter of great seriousness and importance, this does not preclude the play-concept from underlying the proceedings and legal matters of the court.
- The first part of evidence is the need to separate out the legal framework from normal life, sometimes literally in the sense of a specific space for legal matters, in which real life must pause for the rules and procedures of the court.
- Legal professions also take on qualities of playing a character, much like how ancient rituals would don masks and take on the qualities of a role for a festival or dance. The lawyer must discard their self when engaging legally, and must become the character of prosecutor or defendant. The judge must equally become an *arbiter*, who does not exist as their own self, but as a character who stands above the proceedings.
	- Various cases have occurred where lawyers or judges who insert their own lives into the proceedings of a case have been dismissed, primarily because they ruin the integrity of the court. While this does serve towards greater fairness and justice, we can also see how this ties into the play-concept. If you take in unfair information from outside the game, then you have ruined the game for all participants.
- There is also the underlying aspect of the contest, in that each side seeks victory, and they primarily believe that they have the advantage over the other. This is more present in civil cases than criminal cases, but we can see this combative element within legal procedure from either.
- Huizinga goes through several etymological foundations for justice being tied into the same words for scales or balance, which is not as much present in the modern day understandings of justice.
- In a different concept of the legal system, the turning over of goods, including weddings, was often placed as a matter of contests among participating groups and families.
- Fairly short chapter, really. Overall, it was more focused on older concepts of legal procedure, and how they differed from our modern ideas for justice. It's an informative chapter, especially from an anthropological view. Which, this is mostly an anthropological text, so that should be expected. Regardless, this is one of those chapters where it could have been interesting to go into how some of these ideas are still at play in legal procedures today. Again, though, this is not the purpose of the text, so my own expectations are not as important.

#### V Play and War:
- Very quickly, Huizinga establishes that we often relate the concept of war with the concept of games, especially as a form of metaphor for rules of combat, strategy, and victory.
- He does make a quick distinction between wars generally fought among equals in civilization, where rules and honor are far more apparent, and wars that exist between groups that consider the other side to be lesser than them, in which the slaughter of the opposition takes precedent. In the former, it is very much like a game. In the latter, foes are often treated as less than human, and so there are often no formal rules or honor to be had in such a war.
- Still, there are reasons to believe that glory and conquest play a part in most wars, even if it is not the primary factor for the majority of causes of war.
- There is also a difference in how war conducts itself depending on the age, and what cultural factors have taken root within the warring factions.
- The idea of Single Combat, in which champions would be put forward to represent an army, has persisted throughout military history, and continues to invoke the more pure form of this war as play concept.
- This also extends to the judicial aspect of the duel, though not to the same severity. While war was often totalizing, the duel was more symbolic, and the rules were often made to avoid death outright.
- Huizinga goes through some examples of how various cultures would relate themselves to war, starting with Greece and then going on to China. Various rules, honors, duels, and mockeries as a lesser form of combat.
- The rise of international law supersedes the archaic idea of warfare conducted in honor, and justice becomes the preferred method of conducting war. In one sense, this is removing the play-concept from war, and seeks to make it a more formal, work-like structure. On the other hand, this is one outgrowth of the play-concept taking precedent over the other, in which treaties, economic deals, and peace negotiations are preferred contests between nations or peoples instead of bloodshed. In other words, war becomes less like play, but other sectors take the role.
- The portion of history in which the play-concept was the strongest were generally the Medieval kingdoms, typically like the feudal systems of Europe and Japan, in which a noble class treated warfare as a matter of honor and contest. The ideals of war were tied into the ideals of the noble class, and thus the conduct of war, while possibly at its most brutal, was still conducted around general notions of conduct and honor.
- Overall, a very interesting chapter. It's also where I'm now convinced that this book ought to be a companion piece to Nietzsche's "Genealogy of Morals". While Nietzsche was primarily focused on the history and change of moral philosophy, Huizinga actually provides a very good anthropological companion to the concepts of Master and Slave morality. Much of the play-concept appears within various forms of humanity, but the constant re-emergence of the noble classes deciding what denotes "good form" is a fantastic display of what Nietzsche was overall attempting to explain.

#### VI Playing and Knowing:
### Notable Quotes:

#### Foreword:
>There is a third function, however, applicable to both human and animal life, and just as important as reasoning and making—namely, playing. It seems to me that next to Homo Faber, and perhaps on the same level as Homo Sapiens, Homo Ludens, Man the Player, deserves a place in our nomenclature.
>-Page ix
#### I Nature and Significance of Play as a Cultural Phenomenon:
>PLAY is older than culture, for culture, however inadequately defined, always presupposes human society, and animals have not waited for man to teach them their playing. We can safely assert, even, that human civilization has added no essential feature to the general idea of play. Animals play just like men. We have only to watch young dogs to see that all the essentials of human play are present in their merry gambols. They invite one another to play by a certain ceremoniousness of attitude and gesture. They keep to the rule that you shall not bite, or not bite hard, your brother's ear. They pretend to get terribly angry. And—what is most important—in all these doings they plainly experience tremendous fun and enjoyment. Such rompings of young dogs are only one of the simpler forms of animal play. There are other, much more highly developed forms: regular contests and beautiful performances before an admiring public.
>-Page 1

>In play there is something “at play” which transcends the immediate needs of life and imparts meaning to the action. All play means something. If we call the active principle that makes up the essence of play, “instinct”, we explain nothing; if we call it “mind” or “will” we say too much. However we may regard it, the very fact that play has a meaning implies a non–materialistic quality in the nature of the thing itself.
>-Page 1

>Nevertheless it is precisely this fun-element that characterizes the essence of play. Here we have to do with an absolutely primary category of life, familiar to everybody at a glance right down to the animal level. We may well call play a “totality” in the modern sense of the word, and it is as a totality that we must try to understand and evaluate it.
>-Page 3

>We shall try to take play as the player himself takes it: in its primary significance. If we find that play is based on the manipulation of certain images, on a certain “imagination” of reality (i.e. its conversion into images), then our main concern will be to grasp the value and significance of these images and their “imagination”. We shall observe their action in play itself and thus try to understand play as a cultural factor in life.
>-Page 4

>Now in myth and ritual the great instinctive forces of civilized life have their origin: law and order, commerce and profit, craft and art, poetry, wisdom and science. All are rooted in the primaeval soil of play.
>-Page 4/5

>We can say: play is non–seriousness. But apart from the fact that this proposition tells us nothing about the positive qualities of play, it is extraordinarily easy to refute. As soon as we proceed from “play is non–seriousness” to “play is not serious”, the contrast leaves us in the lurch—for some play can be very serious indeed. Moreover we can immediately name several other fundamental categories that likewise come under the heading “non–seriousness” yet have no correspondence whatever with “play”. Laughter, for instance, is in a sense the opposite of seriousness without being absolutely bound up with play. Children's games, football, and chess are played in profound seriousness; the players have not the slightest inclination to laugh. It is worth noting that the purely physiological act of laughing is exclusive to man, whilst the significant function of play is common to both men and animals. The Aristotelian animal ridens characterizes man as distinct from the animal almost more absolutely than homo sapiens.
>-Page 5

>If, therefore, play cannot be directly referred to the categories of truth or goodness, can it be included perhaps in the realm of the aesthetic? Here our judgement wavers. For although the attribute of beauty does not attach to play as such, play nevertheless tends to assume marked elements of beauty. Mirth and grace adhere at the outset to the more primitive forms of play. In play the beauty of the human body in motion reaches its zenith. In its more developed forms it is saturated with rhythm and harmony, the noblest gifts of aesthetic perception known to man. Many and close are the links that connect play with beauty. All the same, we cannot say that beauty is inherent in play as such; so we must leave it at that: play is a function of the living, but is not susceptible of exact definition either logically, biologically, or aesthetically. The play–concept must always remain distinct from all the other forms of thought in which we express the structure of mental and social life. Hence we shall have to confine ourselves to describing the main characteristics of play.
>-Page 5

>First and foremost, then, all play is a voluntary activity. Play to order is no longer play: it could at best be but a forcible imitation of it. By this quality of freedom alone, play marks itself off from the course of the natural process. It is something added thereto and spread out over it like a flowering, an ornament, a garment. Obviously, freedom must be understood here in the wider sense that leaves untouched the philosophical problem of determinism. It may be objected that this freedom does not exist for the animal and the child; they must play because their instinct drives them to it and because it serves to develop their bodily faculties and their powers of selection. The term “instinct”, however, introduces an unknown quantity, and to presuppose the utility of play from the start is to be guilty of a petitio principii. Child and animal play because they enjoy playing, and therein precisely lies their freedom.
>-Page 7

>Here, then, we have the first main characteristic of play: that it is free, is in fact freedom. A second characteristic is closely connected with this, namely, that play is not “ordinary” or “real” life. It is rather a stepping out of “real” life into a temporary sphere of activity with a disposition all of its own. Every child knows perfectly well that he is “only pretending”, or that it was “only for fun”.
>-Page 7 ^FirstQualities

>Any game can at any time wholly run away with the players. The contrast between play and seriousness is always fluid. The inferiority of play is continually being offset by the corresponding superiority of its seriousness. Play turns to seriousness and seriousness to play. Play may rise to heights of beauty and sublimity that leave seriousness far beneath.
>-Page 8

>Play begins, and then at a certain moment it is “over”. It plays itself to an end. While it is in progress all is movement, change, alternation, succession, association, separation. But immediately connected with its limitation as to time there is a further curious feature of play: it at once assumes fixed form as a cultural phenomenon. Once played, it endures as a new–found creation of the mind, a treasure to be retained by the memory. It is transmitted, it becomes tradition. It can be repeated at any time, whether it be “child's play” or a game of chess, or at fixed intervals like a mystery. In this faculty of repetition lies one of the most essential qualities of play. It holds good not only of play as a whole but also of its inner structure. In nearly all the higher forms of play the elements of repetition and alternation (as in the refrain), are like the warp and woof of a fabric.
>-Page 9

>Inside the play–ground an absolute and peculiar order reigns. Here we come across another, very positive feature of play: it creates order, is order. Into an imperfect world and into the confusion of life it brings a temporary, a limited perfection. Play demands order absolute and supreme. The least deviation from it “spoils the game”, robs it of its character and makes it worthless. The profound affinity between play and order is perhaps the reason why play, as we noted in passing, seems to lie to such a large extent in the field of aesthetics. Play has a tendency to be beautiful. It may be that this aesthetic factor is identical with the impulse to create orderly form, which animates play in all its aspects. The words we use to denote the elements of play belong for the most part to aesthetics, terms with which we try to describe the effects of beauty: tension, poise, balance, contrast, variation, solution, resolution, etc. Play casts a spell over us; it is “enchanting”, “captivating”. It is invested with the noblest qualities we are capable of perceiving in things: rhythm and harmony.
>-Page 10

>The player who trespasses against the rules or ignores them is a “spoil–sport”. The spoil–sport is not the same as the false player, the cheat; for the latter pretends to be playing the game and, on the face of it, still acknowledges the magic circle. It is curious to note how much more lenient society is to the cheat than to the spoil–sport. This is because the spoil–sport shatters the play–world itself. By withdrawing from the game he reveals the relativity and fragility of the play–world in which he had temporarily shut himself with others. He robs play of its illusion—a pregnant word which means literally “in-play” (from inlusio, Hindere or inludere). Therefore he must be cast out, for he threatens the existence of the play–community.
>-Page 12

>A play–community generally tends to become permanent even after the game is over. Of course, not every game of marbles or every bridge-party leads to the founding of a club. But the feeling of being “apart together” in an exceptional situation, of sharing something important, of mutually withdrawing from the rest of the world and rejecting the usual norms, retains its magic beyond the duration of the individual game. The club pertains to play as the hat to the head. It would be rash to explain all the associations which the anthropologist calls “phratria”—e.g. clans, brotherhoods, etc.—simply as play–communities; nevertheless it has been shown again and again how difficult it is to draw the line between, on the one hand, permanent social groupings— particularly in archaic cultures with their extremely important, solemn, indeed sacred customs—and the sphere of play on the other.
>-Page 12

>Summing up the formal characteristics of play we might call it a free activity standing quite consciously outside “ordinary” life as being “not serious”, but at the same time absorbing the player intensely and utterly. It is an activity connected with no material interest, and no profit can be gained by it. It proceeds within its own proper boundaries of time and space according to fixed rules and in an orderly manner. It promotes the formation of social groupings which tend to surround themselves with secrecy and to stress their difference from the common world by disguise or other means.
>-Page 13

>So that according to him we are dealing with a necessary mental process of transformation. The thrill, the “being seized” by the phenomena of life and nature is condensed by reflex action, as it were, to poetic expression and art. It is difficult to describe the process of creative imagination in words that are more to the point, though they can hardly be called a true “explanation”. The mental road from aesthetic or mystical, or at any rate meta-logical, perception of cosmic order to ritual play remains as dark as before.
>-Page 16

>In the form and function of play, itself an independent entity which is senseless and irrational, man's consciousness that he is embedded in a sacred order of things finds its first, highest, and holiest expression. Gradually the significance of a sacred act permeates the playing. Ritual grafts itself upon it; but the primary thing is and remains play.
>-Page 17

>Let us consider for a moment the following argument. The child plays in complete—we can well say, in sacred—earnest. But it plays and knows that it plays. The sportsman, too, plays with all the fervour of a man enraptured, but he still knows that he is playing. The actor on the stage is wholly absorbed in his playing, but is all the time conscious of “the play”. The same holds good of the violinist, though he may soar to realms beyond this world. The play–character, therefore, may attach to the sublimest forms of action. Can we now extend the line to ritual and say that the priest performing the rites of sacrifice is only playing? At first sight it seems preposterous, for if you grant it for one religion you must grant it for all. Hence our ideas of ritual, magic, liturgy, sacrament and mystery would all fall within the play–concept. In dealing with abstractions we must always guard against overstraining their significance. We would merely be playing with words were we to stretch the play–concept unduly. But, all things considered, I do not think we are falling into that error when we characterize ritual as play. The ritual act has all the formal and essential characteristics of play which we enumerated above, particularly in so far as it transports the participants to another world.
>-Page 18

>The play–mood is labile in its very nature. At any moment “ordinary life” may reassert its rights either by an impact from without, which interrupts the game, or by an offence against the rules, or else from within, by a collapse of the play spirit, a sobering, a disenchantment.
>-Page 20

>We must ask whether this formal similarity entitles us to extend the qualification “play” to the consciousness of the holy, the faith embodied in these higher creeds. If we accept the Platonic definition of play there is nothing preposterous or irreverent in doing so. Play consecrated to the Deity, the highest goal of man's endeavour—such was Plato's conception of religion. In following him we in no way abandon the holy mystery, or cease to rate it as the highest attainable expression of that which escapes logical understanding. The ritual act, or an important part of it, will always remain within the play category, but in this seeming subordination the recognition of its holiness is not lost.
>-Page 26

#### II The Play-Concept as Expressed in Language:
>WHEN speaking of play as something known to all, and when trying to analyse or define the idea expressed in that word, we must always bear in mind that the idea as we know it is defined and perhaps limited by the word we use for it. Word and idea are not born of scientific or logical thinking but of creative language, which means of innumerable languages—for this act of “conception” has taken place over and over again. Nobody will expect that every language, in forming its idea of and expression for play, could have hit on the same idea or found a single word for it, in the way that every language has one definite word for “hand” or “foot”. The matter is not as simple as that.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 28). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Such a concept, we felt, seemed to be tolerably well defined in the following terms: play is a voluntary activity or occupation executed within certain fixed limits of time and place, according to rules freely accepted but absolutely binding, having its aim in itself and accompanied by a feeling of tension, joy and the consciousness that it is “different” from “ordinary life”. Thus defined, the concept seemed capable of embracing everything we call “play” in animals, children and grown–ups: games of strength and skill, inventing games, guessing games, games of chance, exhibitions and performances of all kinds.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 28). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>It is probably no accident that the very peoples who have a pronounced and multifarious play–”instinct” have several distinct expressions for the play–activity. I think this is more or less true of Greek, Sanskrit, Chinese and English.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 29). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Despite my admiration for Professor Bolkestein's lasting and lucid interpretation of Greek culture, and despite the fact that Greek is not alone in linguistically distinguishing between contest and play, I am fervently convinced of their underlying identity. Since we shall have to return again and again to this conceptual distinction I shall confine myself here to one argument only. The agon in Greek life, or the contest anywhere else in the world, bears all the formal characteristics of play, and as to its function belongs almost wholly to the sphere of the festival, which is the play–sphere. It is quite impossible to separate the contest as a cultural function from the complex “play–festival-rite”.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 31). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>In remarkable contrast to Greek with its changing and heterogeneous terms for the play–function, Latin has really only one word to cover the whole field of play: ludus, from ludere, of which lusus is a direct derivative. We should observe that jocus, jocari in the special sense of joking and jesting does not mean play proper in classical Latin.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 35). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>It is remarkable that ludus, as the general term for play, has not only not passed into the Romance languages but has left hardly any traces there, so far as I can see. In all of them—and this necessarily means at a quite early period—ludus has been supplanted by a derivative of jocus, which extended its specific sense of joking and jesting to “play” in general. Thus French has jeu> jouer; Italian gioco, giocare; Spanish juego, jugar; Portuguese jogo, jogar; Rumanian Joe, juca; while similar words occur in Catalan, Provençal and Rhaeto-Romanic. We must leave to one side the question whether the disappearance of ludus and ludere is due to phonetic or to semantic causes.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 36). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Though you can “ein Spiel treiben” in German and “een Spiel doen” in Dutch and “pursue a game” in English, the proper verb is “play” itself. You “play a game”, or “spielen ein Spiel”. To some extent this is lost in English by the doublet play and game. Nevertheless the fact remains that in order to express the nature of the activity the idea contained in the noun must be repeated in the verb. Does not this mean that the act of playing is of such a peculiar and independent nature as to lie outside the ordinary categories of action? Playing is no “doing” in the ordinary sense; you do not “do” a game as you “do” or “go” fishing, or hunting, or Morris-dancing, or woodwork—you “play” it.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 37). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The English “play”, “to play” is very remarkable from a semantic point of view. Etymologically the word comes from the Anglo–Saxon plega, plegan meaning primarily “play” or “to play”, but also rapid movement, a gesture, a grasp of the hands, clapping, playing on a musical instrument and all kinds of bodily activity.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 38). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Who can deny that in all these concepts—challenge, danger, contest, etc.—we are very close to the play–sphere? Play and danger, risk, chance, feat—it is all a single field of action where something is at stake. One is tempted to conclude that the words play and pflegen together with their derivatives are not only formally but semantically identical.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 40). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The rendering of the Vulgate ludant is faultless: “let them play”. The Hebrew text has here a form of the verb sahaq, meaning primarily “to laugh”, next “to do something jestingly”, and also “to dance”. In the Septuagint the wording is as follows: ἀναστήτωσαν δὴ τὰ παιδάρια καì παιζάτωσαν ἐνώπιον ἡμῶν. It is clear that there can be no question of poetic licence; the plain fact is that play may be deadly yet still remain play—which is all the more reason for not separating play and contest as concepts.1 A further conclusion emerges from this. Given the indivisibility of play and battle in the archaic mind, the assimilation of hunting to play naturally follows. We find it everywhere in language and literature and there is no need to dwell upon it here.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 41). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>If we stick to the formal and functional characteristics of play as summed up earlier it is evident that few of them are really illustrative of the sexual act. It is not the act as such that the spirit of language tends to conceive as play; rather the road thereto, the preparation for and introduction to “love”, which is often made enticing by all sorts of playing. This is particularly true when one of the sexes has to rouse or win the other over to copulating. The dynamic elements of play mentioned by Buytendijk, such as the deliberate creation of obstacles, adornment, surprise, pretence, tension, etc., all belong to the process of flirting and wooing. Nevertheless none of these functions can be called play in the strict sense. Only in the dance–steps, the preening and strutting of birds does the real play–element show itself. Caresses as such do not bear the character of play, though they may do on occasion; but it would be erroneous to incorporate the sexual act itself, as love–play, in the play category. The biological process of pairing does not answer to the formal characteristics of play as we postulated them. Language also normally distinguishes between love–play and copulation. The term “play” is specially or even exclusively reserved for erotic relationships falling outside the social norm.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 43). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>We can say, perhaps, that in language the play–concept seems to be much more fundamental than its opposite. The need for a comprehensive term expressing “not–play” must have been rather feeble, and the various expressions for “seriousness” are but a secondary attempt on the part of language to invent the conceptual opposite of “play”. They are grouped round the ideas of “zeal”, “exertion”, “painstaking”, despite the fact that in themselves all these qualities may be found associated with play as well. The appearance of a term for “earnest” means that people have become conscious of the play–concept as an independent entity— a process which, as we remarked before, happens rather late. Small wonder, then, that the Germanic languages with their very pronounced and comprehensive play–concept, also stressed its opposite so forcefully.
>
>Leaving aside the linguistic question and observing the play–earnest antithesis somewhat more closely, we find that the two terms are not of equal value: play is positive, earnest negative. The significance of “earnest” is defined by and exhausted in the negation of “play”—earnest is simply “not playing” and nothing more. The significance of “play”, on the other hand, is by no means defined or exhausted by calling it “not–earnest”, or “not serious”. Play is a thing by itself. The play–concept as such is of a higher order than is seriousness. For seriousness seeks to exclude play, whereas play can very well include seriousness.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 44-45). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

#### III Play and Contest as Civilizing Functions:
>WHEN speaking of the play–element in culture we do not mean that among the various activities of civilized life an important place is reserved for play, nor do we mean that civilization has arisen out of play by some evolutionary process, in the sense that something which was originally play passed into something which was no longer play and could henceforth be called culture. The view we take in the following pages is that culture arises in the form of play, that it is played from the very beginning. Even those activities which aim at the immediate satisfaction of vital needs— hunting, for instance—tend, in archaic society, to take on the play–form. Social life is endued with supra–biological forms, in the shape of play, which enhance its value. It is through this playing that society expresses its interpretation of life and the world. By this we do not mean that play turns into culture, rather that in its earliest phases culture has the play–character, that it proceeds in the shape and the mood of play. In the twin union of play and culture, play is primary.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 46). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>As a rule the play–element gradually recedes into the background, being absorbed for the most part in the sacred sphere. The remainder crystallizes as knowledge: folklore, poetry, philosophy, or in the various forms of judicial and social life. The original play–element is then almost completely hidden behind cultural phenomena. But at any moment, even in a highly developed civilization, the play–“instinct” may reassert itself in full force, drowning the individual and the mass in the intoxication of an immense game.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 46-47). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>As we have indicated before, all the basic factors of play, both individual and communal, are already present in animal life—to wit, contests, performances, exhibitions, challenges, preenings, struttings and showings–off, pretences and binding rules. It is doubly remarkable that birds, phylogenetically so far removed from human beings, should have so much in common with them. Woodcocks perform dances, crows hold flying–matches, bower–birds and others decorate their nests, song–birds chant their melodies. Thus competitions and exhibitions as amusements do not proceed from culture, they rather precede it.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 47). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>We would allude once more to the remarkable testimony from the Second Book of Samuel, where a fight to the death between two groups was still called “playing”, the word used being taken from the sphere of laughter. On numerous Greek vases we can see that a contest of armed men is characterized as an agon by the presence of the flute–players who accompany it. At the Olympic games there were duels fought to the death.1 The mighty tours de force accomplished by Thor and his companions in their contest with the Man of Utgardaloki are called leika, “play”. For all these reasons it would not seem overbold to consider the terminological disparity between contest and play in Greek as the more or less accidental failure to abstract a general concept that would have embraced both. In short, the question as to whether we are entitled to include the contest in the play–category can be answered unhesitatingly in the affirmative.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 48-49). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>“There is something at stake”—the essence of play is contained in that phrase. But this “something” is not the material result of the play, not the mere fact that the ball is in the hole, but the ideal fact that the game is a success or has been successfully concluded. Success gives the player a satisfaction that lasts a shorter or a longer while as the case may be. The pleasurable feeling of satisfaction mounts with the presence of spectators, though these are not essential to it. A person who gets a game of patience “out” is doubly delighted when somebody is watching him. In all games it is very important that the player should be able to boast of his success to others.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 49-50). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>What is “winning”, and what is “won”? Winning means showing oneself superior in the outcome of a game. Nevertheless, the evidence of this superiority tends to confer upon the winner a semblance of superiority in general. In this respect he wins something more than the game as such. He has won esteem, obtained honour; and this honour and esteem at once accrue to the benefit of the group to which the victor belongs. Here we have another very important characteristic of play: success won readily passes from the individual to the group. But the following feature is still more important: the competitive “instinct” is not in the first place a desire for power or a will to dominate. The primary thing is the desire to excel others, to be the first and to be honoured for that. The question whether, in the result, the power of the individual or the group will be increased, takes only a second place. The main thing is to have won. The purest example of a victory which has nothing visible or enjoyable about it save the mere fact of winning, is afforded by a game of chess.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 50). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>We might say that proper to all the derivations of the Latin root vad is a sense of passion, of chance, of daring, as regards both economic activity and play activity. Pure avarice neither trades nor plays; it does not gamble. To dare, to take risks, to bear uncertainty, to endure tension—these are the essence of the play spirit. Tension adds to the importance of the game and, as it increases, enables the player to forget that he is only playing.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 51). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>It is a well–known fact that such an idea underlies most primitive ritual. Every ceremony well performed, every game or contest duly won, every act of sacrifice auspiciously concluded, fervently convinces archaic man that a boon and a blessing have thereby been procured for the community. The sacrifices or sacred dances have been successfully executed; now all is well, the higher powers are on our side, the cosmic order is safeguarded, social well–being is assured for us and ours. Of course this feeling is not to be imagined as the end-result of a series of reasonable deductions. It is rather a life–feeling, a feeling of satisfaction crystallized into faith more or less formulated in the mind.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 54). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>All these forms of contest betray their connection with ritual over and over again by the constant belief that they are indispensable for the smooth running of the seasons, the ripening of crops, the prosperity of the whole year. If the outcome of a contest as such, as a performance, is deemed to influence the course of nature, it follows that the particular kind of contest through which this result is obtained is a matter of small moment. It is the winning itself that counts. Every victory represents, that is, realizes for the victor the triumph of the good powers over the bad, and at the same time the salvation of the group that effects it. The victory not only represents that salvation but, by so doing, makes it effective.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 56). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Indeed, we may go one further and say that for the human mind the ideas of happiness, luck and fate seem to lie very close to the realm of the sacred. In order to realize these mental associations we moderns have only to think of the sort of futile auguries we all used to practise in childhood without really believing in them, and which a perfectly balanced adult not in the least given to superstition may sometimes catch himself doing. As a rule we do not attribute much importance to them. It is rather rare to find such futilities actually recorded in literature, but as an example I would refer you to the passage in Tolstoy's Resurrection, where one of the judges on entering the court says silently to himself: “If I reach my seat with an even number of steps I shall have no stomach pains to-day”.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 56-57). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The potlatch and everything connected with it hinges on winning, on being superior, on glory, prestige and, last but not least, revenge. Always, even when only one person is the feast–giver, there are two groups standing in opposition but bound by a spirit of hostility and friendship combined. In order to understand this ambivalent attitude we must recognize that the essential feature of the potlatch is the winning of it. The opposed groups do not contend for wealth or power but simply for the pleasure of parading their superiority—in a word, for glory.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 59). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The underlying principle in all the strange usages associated with the potlatch is, in my view, the agonistic “instinct” pure and simple. They must all be regarded first and foremost as a violent expression of the human need to fight. Once this is admitted we may call them, strictly speaking, “play”—serious play, fateful and fatal play, bloody play, sacred play, but nonetheless that playing which, in archaic society, raises the individual or the collective personality to a higher power.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 61). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>From the life of childhood right up to the highest achievements of civilization one of the strongest incentives to perfection, both individual and social, is the desire to be praised and honoured for one's excellence. In praising another each praises himself. We want to be honoured for our virtues. We want the satisfaction of having done something well. Doing something well means doing it better than others. In order to excel one must prove one's excellence; in order to merit recognition, merit must be made manifest. Competition serves to give proof of superiority. This is particularly true of archaic society.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 63). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The virtue of a man of quality consists in the set of properties which make him fit to fight and command. Among these liberality, wisdom and justice occupy a high place. It is perfectly natural that with many peoples the word for virtue derives from the idea of manliness or “virility”, as for instance the Latin virtus, which retained its meaning of “courage” for a very long time—until, in fact, Christian thought became dominant. The same is true of the Arabic muru'a, comprising, like the Greek ἀρετή, the whole semantic complex of strength, valour, wealth, right, good management, morality, urbanity, fine manners, magnanimity, liberality and moral perfection. In every archaic community that is healthy, being based on the tribal life of warriors and nobles, there will blossom an ideal of chivalry and chivalrous conduct, whether it be in Greece, Arabia, Japan or mediaeval Christendom. And this virile ideal of virtue will always be bound up with the conviction that honour, to be valid, must be publicly acknowledged and forcibly maintained if need be. Even in Aristotle honour is called the “prize of virtue”.1 His thought is, of course, far above the level of archaic culture. He does not call honour the aim or basis of virtue, but the natural measure of it. “Men crave honour,” he says, “in order to persuade themselves of their own worth, their virtue. They aspire to be honoured by persons of judgement and in virtue of their real value.”

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 64). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>This boosting of one's own virtue as a form of contest slips over quite naturally into contumely of one's adversary, and this in its turn becomes a contest in its own right. It is remarkable how large a place these bragging and scoffing matches occupy in the most diverse civilizations. Their play–character is beyond dispute: we have only to think of the doings of little boys to qualify such slanging–matches as a form of play. All the same, we must distinguish carefully between the formal boasting or. scoffing tournament and the more spontaneous bravado which used to inaugurate or accompany a fight with weapons, though it is not at. all easy to draw the line.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 65). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>A too narrow conception of the agonistic principle has induced Ehrenberg to deny it to Roman civilization, or actually to attribute to it an anti–agonistic character.1 It is true that contests between free men played a comparatively small part here, but this is not to say that the agonistic element was altogether lacking in the structure of Roman civilization. Rather we are dealing with the singular phenomenon showing how the competitive impulse shifted, at an early period, from the protagonist to the spectator, who merely watches the struggles of others appointed for that purpose. Without a doubt this shift is closely connected with the profoundly ritualistic character of the Roman games themselves, for this vicarious attitude is quite in place in ritual, where the contestants are regarded as representing—i.e. fighting on behalf of—the spectators. Gladiatorial games, contests between wild beasts, chariot–races, etc., lose nothing of their agonistic nature even when carried out by slaves. The ludi were either associated with the regular yearly festivals or were ludi votivi, held in honour of some vow, usually to pay homage to the deceased or, more particularly, to avert the wrath of the gods. The slightest offence against the ritual or the most accidental disturbance invalidated the whole performance. This points to the sacred character of the action.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 74). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>There was no transition from “battle to play” in Greece, nor from play to battle, but a development of culture in play–like contest. In Greece as elsewhere the play–element was present and significant from the beginning. Our point of departure must be the conception of an almost childlike play–sense expressing itself in various play–forms, some serious, some playful, but all rooted in ritual and productive of culture by allowing the innate human need of rhythm, harmony, change, alternation, contrast and climax, etc., to unfold in full richness. Coupled with this play–sense is a spirit that strives for honour, dignity, superiority and beauty. Magic and mystery, heroic longings, the foreshadowings of music, sculpture and logic all seek form and expression in noble play. A later generation will call the age that knew such aspirations “heroic”.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 75). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>During the growth of a civilization the agonistic function attains its most beautiful form, as well as its most conspicuous, in the archaic phase. As a civilization becomes more complex, more variegated and more overladen, and as the technique of production and social life itself become more finely organized, the old cultural soil is gradually smothered under a rank layer of ideas, systems of thought and knowledge, doctrines, rules and regulations, moralities and conventions which have all lost touch with play. Civilization, we then say, has grown more serious; it assigns only a secondary place to playing. The heroic period is over, and the agonistic phase, too, seems a thing of the past.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 75). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

#### IV Play and Law:
>AT FIRST sight few things would seem to be further apart than the domain of law, justice and jurisprudence, and play. High seriousness, deadly earnest and the vital interests of the individual and society reign supreme in everything that pertains to the law. The etymological foundation of most of the words which express the ideas of law and justice lies in the sphere of setting, fixing, establishing, stating, appointing, holding, ordering, choosing, dividing, binding, etc. All these ideas would seem to have little or no connection with, indeed to be opposed to, the semantic sphere which gives rise to the words for play. However, as we have observed all along, the sacredness and seriousness of an action by no means preclude its play–quality.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 76). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Contest means play. As we have seen, there is no sufficient reason to deny any contest whatsoever the character of play. The playful and the contending, lifted on to the plane of that sacred seriousness which every society demands for its justice, are still discernible to-day in all forms of judicial life. The pronouncement of justice takes place in a “court”, for a start. This court is still, in the full sense of the word, the ἱερὸς ϰύϰλoς, the sacred circle within which the judges are shown sitting, in the shield of Achilles.1 Every place from which justice is pronounced is a veritable temenos, a sacred spot cut off and hedged in from the “ordinary” world.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 76-77). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The judge's wig, however, is more than a mere relic of antiquated professional dress. Functionally it has close connections with the dancing masks of savages. It transforms the wearer into another “being”… And it is by no means the only very ancient feature which the strong sense of tradition so peculiar to the British has preserved in law. The sporting element and the humour so much in evidence in British legal practice is one of the basic features of law in archaic society.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 77). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Let us turn back once more to the archaic forms of legal procedure. Any proceeding before a judge will always and in all circumstances be dominated by the intense desire of each party to gain his cause. The desire to win is so strong that the agonistic factor cannot be discounted for a single moment. If this does not of itself suffice to disclose the connection between legal justice and play, the formal characteristics of the law as practised lend added weight to our contention. The judicial contest is always subject to a system of restrictive rules which, quite apart from the limitations of time and place, set the lawsuit firmly and squarely in the domain of orderly, antithetical play. The active association of law and play, particularly in archaic culture, can be seen from three points of view. The lawsuit can be regarded as a game of chance, a contest, or a verbal battle.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 78). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Turning our eyes from the administration of justice in highly developed civilizations to that which obtains in less advanced phases of culture, we see that the idea of right and wrong, the ethical–juridical conception, comes to be overshadowed by the idea of winning and losing, that is, the purely agonistic conception. It is not so much the abstract question of right and wrong that occupies the archaic mind as the very concrete question of winning or losing. Once given this feeble ethical standard the agonistic factor will gain enormously in legal practice the further back we go; and as the agonistic element increases so does the element of chance, with the result that we soon find ourselves in the play–sphere. We are confronted by a mental world in which the notion of decision by oracles, by the judgement of God, by ordeal, by sortilege—i.e. by play—and the notion of decision by judicial sentence, fuse in a single complex of thought. Justice is made subservient—and quite sincerely—to the rules of the game. We, still acknowledge the incontrovertibility of such decisions when, failing to make up our minds, we resort to drawing lots or “tossing up”.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 78-79). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The winning as such is, for the archaic mind, proof of truth and rightness. The outcome of every contest, be it a trial of strength or a game of chance, is a sacred decision vouchsafed by the gods. We still fall into this habit of thought when we accept a rule that runs: unanimity decides the issue, or when we accept a majority vote. Only in a more advanced phase of religious experience will the formula run: the contest (or ordeal) is a revelation of truth and justice because some deity is directing the fall of the dice or the outcome of the battle.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 81-82). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>It is certainly no accident that contests play a particularly important part in the choosing of a bride or bridegroom. The English word “wedding”, like the Dutch “bruiloft”, harks back to the dawn of legal and social history. “Wedding,” derived from the Anglo-Saxon wed and ultimately from the Latin vadium, speaks of the “pledge” or “gage” with which one bound oneself to keep an “engagement” already contracted. Bruiloft—wedding-party—is the exact equivalent of the Old English brydhleap, Old Norse brudhlaup, Old High German brutlouft, meaning the race run for the bride, this being one of the trials on which the contract depended.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 83). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The lawsuit remains, in the nature of things, a verbal battle even when it has lost its play–quality wholly or in part, actually or in appearance, with the progress of civilization. For the purposes of our theme, however, we are concerned only with the archaic phase of this verbal battle, where the agonistic factor is at its strongest and the ideal foundation of justice at its weakest. Here it is not the most meticulously deliberated juristic argument that tips the balance, but the most withering and excoriating invective. The agon in this case consists almost exclusively in the endeavour of each party to exceed the other in choice vituperation and so to keep the upper hand.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 84). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>It was only when Stoicism became the fashion that efforts were made to freejuristic eloquence of the play–character and purify it in accordance with the severe standards of truth and dignity professed by the Stoics. The first man who attempted to put this new approach into practice was a certain Rutilius Rufus. He lost his cause and had to retreat into exile.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 88). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

#### V Play and War:
>EVER since words existed for fighting and playing, men have been wont to call war a game. We have already posed the question whether this is to be regarded only as a metaphor, and come to a negative conclusion. Language everywhere must have expressed matters in that way from the moment words for combat and play existed. The two ideas often seem to blend absolutely in the archaic mind. Indeed, all fighting that is bound by rules bears the formal characteristics of play by that very limitation. We can call it the most intense, the most energetic form of play and at the same time the most palpable and primitive. Young dogs and small boys fight “for fun”, with rules limiting the degree of violence; nevertheless the limits of licit violence do not necessarily stop at the spilling of blood or even at killing. The mediaeval tournament was always regarded as a sham–fight, hence as play, but in its earliest forms it is reasonably certain that the joustings were held in deadly earnest and fought out to the death, like the “playing” of the young men before Abner and Joab.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 89). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>We can only speak of war as a cultural function so long as it is waged within a sphere whose members regard each other as equals or antagonists with equal rights; in other words its cultural function depends on its play–quality. This condition changes as soon as war is waged outside the sphere of equals, against groups not recognized as human beings and thus deprived of human rights—barbarians, devils, heathens, heretics and “lesser breeds without the law”. In such circumstances war loses its play–quality altogether and can only remain within the bounds of civilization in so far as the parties to it accept certain limitations for the sake of their own honour. Until recently the “law of nations” was generally held to constitute such a system of limitation, recognizing as it did the ideal of a community of mankind with rights and claims for all, and expressly separating the state of war—by declaring it—from peace on the one hand and criminal violence on the other. It remained for the theory of “total war” to banish war's cultural function and extinguish the last vestige of the play–element.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 89-90). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>We are once more dealing with that same sphere of archaic thought in which chance, fate, judgement, contest and play lie side by side as so many holy things. It is only natural that war too should fall under this head. One wages war in order to obtain a decision of holy validity. The test of the will of the gods is victory or defeat. So that instead of trying out your strength in a contest, or throwing dice, or consulting the oracle, or disputing by fierce words—all of which may equally well serve to elicit the divine decision—you can resort to war. As we have seen, the connection between decision and Deity is explicit in the German word for ordeal—”Gottesurteil”, though fundamentally the ordeal is simply judgement, any judgement whatsoever. Every decision acquired by the ritually correct forms is a “judgement of God”. It is only secondarily that the technical idea of the ordeal is associated with definite proofs of miraculous power.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 91). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>On the other hand it is quite in accordance With the ritual character underlying the private duel that the fighting should not aim at killing but stop at the shedding of blood, when honour is satisfied. Hence the modern duel after the French fashion, which is not as a rule prosecuted beyond the wounding of one of the parties, should not be thought of as a rather ridiculous effeminization of a stern custom. Being essentially a play–form, the duel is symbolical; it is the shedding of blood and not the killing that matters. We can call it a late form of ritual blood–play, the orderly regulation of the death–blow struck unawares in anger. The spot where the duel is fought bears all the marks of a play–ground; the weapons have to be exactly alike as in certain games; there is a signal for the start and the finish, and the number of shots is prescribed. When blood flows, honour is vindicated and restored.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 95). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Of these two factors, chivalry was one of the great stimulants of mediaeval civilization, and however constantly the ideal was belied in reality it served as a basis for international law, which is one of the indispensable safeguards for the community of mankind.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 96). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>It would seem that wherever literature sings the praises of noble and chivalrous war, criticism raises its head, recommending tactical and strategical considerations above fine points of honour.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 97). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>A custom that stems from the idea of war as a noble game of honour and still lingers even in the dehumanized wars of to–day, is the exchanging of civilities with the enemy. A certain element of satire is seldom lacking, and this makes the playful character of it still more evident. The Chinese war lords of ancient times used to exchange jugs of wine which were solemnly drunk amid reminiscences of a more peaceful past and protestations of mutual esteem.1 They greeted one another with all manner of compliments and reverences, swapped weapons just like Glaucos and Diomedes. Even at the siege of Breda—not the famous one of 1625 immortalized by Velasquez' Lances, but that of 1637 when the town was recovered by the Dutch under Frederick Henry of Orange—the Spanish commandant caused a coach and four that had been captured by the beleaguered inhabitants to be civilly returned to its owner the Count of Nassau, with a present of 900 guilders for his soldiery. Sometimes the adversaries will give each other mocking advice. To quote another Chinese instance a warrior, on one of the innumerable campaigns of Chin against Ch'u, demonstrates with infuriating patience how a chariot should be extricated from the mud where it had stuck. All he gets by way of thanks from the enemy soldier is a venomous: “We are not so practised in the art of running away as the inhabitants of your great country!”

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 98). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The primitive ideal of honour and nobility—rooted in that first of sins, Superbia—is superseded in more advanced phases of civilization by the ideal of justice, or rather, this ideal attaches itself to it and, however miserably put into practice, henceforth becomes the recognized and desiderated norm of human society, which has now grown from a huddle of clans and tribes to an association of great nations and States. The “law of nations” derives from the agonistic sphere as the consciousness, or voice of conscience, which says: “This goes against honour, is against the rules”. Once a thorough-going system of international obligations based on ethics has been developed, there is hardly any room for the agonistic element in the relations of States, for the system tries to sublimate the instinct of political struggle in a true sense of justice and equity. In a community of States bound by one international law universally recognized there is, in theory, no reason for agonistic warfare among its own members. Even so, such a community will not have lost all the features of a play–community. Its principle of reciprocal rights, its diplomatic forms, its mutual obligations in the matter of honouring treaties and, in the event of war, officially abrogating peace, all bear a formal resemblance to play–rules inasmuch as they are only binding while the game itself—i.e. the need for order in human affairs—is recognized. We might, in a purely formal sense, call all society a game, if we bear in mind that this game is the living principle of all civilization.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (pp. 100-101). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Things have now come to such a pass that the system of international law is no longer acknowledged, or observed, as the very basis of culture and civilized living. As soon as one member or more of a community of States virtually denies the binding character of international law and, either in practice or in theory, proclaims the interests and power of its own group—be it nation, party, class, church or whatsoever else—as the sole norm of its political behaviour, not only does the last vestige of the immemorial play–spirit vanish but with it any claim to civilization at all. Society then sinks down to the level of the barbaric, and original violence retakes its ancient rights.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 101). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>The innate desire to be first will still drive the power-groups into collision and may lead them to incredible extremes of infatuation and frenzied megalomania. It makes little difference whether one gives adherence to the doctrine of yesterday which interpreted history as the product of “inevitable and immutable” economic forces, or sets up brand-new “Weltanschauungen” which merely put a pseudo-scientific label on the eternal desire to succeed and excel. At bottom it is always a question of winning—though we know well enough that this form of “winning” can bring no gain.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 101). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>Such an ideal of noble strife, fulfilled in myth and legend, is one of the strongest incentives to civilization. It has more than once given rise to a system of martial athletics and ceremonial social play which together adorned real life with poetry, as in mediaeval chivalry and Japanese bushido. Here the power of imagination itself works on the personal bearing of the noble class, hardening their courage and heightening their sense of duty. The ideal of noble contest is particularly evident in a society where a military nobility with moderate landed property obeys a monarch regarded as divine or sacred, and where the central duty of life is loyalty to your lord. Only in such a feudally constructed society, in which no free man is required to work, can chivalry flourish and with it the tournament. Only under a feudal aristocracy are deadly serious vows made to accomplish unheard-of feats; only here do banners, crests and scutcheons become objects of veneration, chivalric orders bloom, and questions of rank and precedence become the most vital in life. Only a feudal aristocracy has time for such things.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 102). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

>In speaking of all this as “the first–fruits of civilization” we are in danger of forgetting their sacred origin. In history, art and literature everything that we perceive as beautiful and noble play was once sacred play. The tournaments and joustings, the orders, the vows, the dubbings are all vestiges of primaeval initiation–rites. The links in this long chain of development are lost to us. The chivalry of Mediaeval Christendom as we know it expends itself in artificially keeping up or even deliberately refurbishing certain cultural elements handed down from a long–forgotten past. But the sumptuous apparatus of codes of honour, courtly demeanour, heraldry, chivalric orders and tournaments had not lost all meaning even towards the close of the Middle Ages. It was in trying to describe the purpose of all this in my earlier book2 that the intimate connection between culture and play first dawned on me.

Huizinga, J.. Homo Ludens Ils 86 (International Library of Sociology) (p. 104). Taylor & Francis. Kindle Edition. 

#### VI Playing and Knowing:
