### Homo Ludens:
- Finished reading this for a potential conference proposal, which I now need to complete.
- First, the fun part: Many of the underlying aspects of this book actually show up in the Kojima Productions company message from Hideo Kojima, and the logo for the company is named Ludens. I don't know how well Kojima knows the book itself, but it's clear that he came across Huizinga's work at some point, and that it's stuck with him.
	  From Sapiens to Ludens We are Homo Ludens (Those who Play).
	  "Playing" is not simply a pastime, it is the primordial basis of imagination and creation. Truth be told, Homo Ludens (Those who Play) are simultaneously Homo Faber (Those who Create).
	Directly relates to this section:
		There is a third function, however, applicable to both human and animal life, and just as important as reasoning and making—namely, playing. It seems to me that next to Homo Faber, and perhaps on the same level as Homo Sapiens, Homo Ludens, Man the Player, deserves a place in our nomenclature.
- Just want to touch on general thoughts and feelings about the book, and why I think it's a fantastic read
	- Overall, it has a very large focus on the anthropological record, and it's primary focus is to shift our understanding of play as a major operating function of culture. Specifically, that Culture doesn't create play, nor is Culture an outgrowth of play, but that Culture *is* play, and that one can find the play-element throughout much of the anthropological record.
	-  It's also important to note that this doesn't mean that play defines all parts of culture, which Huizinga makes especially clear when examining the 19th and 20th century. Rather, it's that almost everything in culture can trace back to an original play-element, and that one can often find those origins when examining various aspects as well.
		- "Now in myth and ritual the great instinctive forces of civilized life have their origin: law and order, commerce and profit, craft and art, poetry, wisdom and science. All are rooted in the primaeval soil of play."
	- Points that are continually reiterated: Seriousness is not the absence or opposite of play. Often play is taken incredibly seriously. There really is no definable opposite to play itself, other than the absence of play, which is difficult to delineate to a stringent degree.
		- "We can say: play is non–seriousness. But apart from the fact that this proposition tells us nothing about the positive qualities of play, it is extraordinarily easy to refute. As soon as we proceed from “play is non–seriousness” to “play is not serious”, the contrast leaves us in the lurch—for some play can be very serious indeed. Moreover we can immediately name several other fundamental categories that likewise come under the heading “non–seriousness” yet have no correspondence whatever with “play”. Laughter, for instance, is in a sense the opposite of seriousness without being absolutely bound up with play. Children's games, football, and chess are played in profound seriousness; the players have not the slightest inclination to laugh. It is worth noting that the purely physiological act of laughing is exclusive to man, whilst the significant function of play is common to both men and animals. The Aristotelian animal ridens characterizes man as distinct from the animal almost more absolutely than homo sapiens."
	- The important elements of play could be summed up as a temporally-bounded, ritualistic competitiveness. A game is something that exists within a magic circle, separated from reality, and follows its own set of rules for the purpose of achieving some end, typically victory in the game. In this way, we can see elements of play within religious ritual, war, early legal procedures, athletics, philosophy, and so on.
		- "Here, then, we have the first main characteristic of play: that it is free, is in fact freedom. A second characteristic is closely connected with this, namely, that play is not “ordinary” or “real” life. It is rather a stepping out of “real” life into a temporary sphere of activity with a disposition all of its own. Every child knows perfectly well that he is “only pretending”, or that it was “only for fun”."
	- While the overall purpose of the book is to demonstrate how culture grew in the play-element, the last two chapters also serve as a bit of a treatise on the concept of modern civilization suppressing the play instinct, and how this is becoming a destructive force. Given that the book came out in the late 1930s, Huizinga was primarily talking about both the rise of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union
		  "Closely akin to this, if at a slightly deeper psychological level, is the insatiable thirst for trivial recreation and crude sensationalism, the delight in mass–meetings, mass–demonstrations, parades, etc. The club is a very ancient institution, but it is a disaster when whole nations turn into clubs, for these, besides promoting the precious qualities of friendship and loyalty, are also hotbeds of sectarianism, intolerance, suspicion, superciliousness and quick to defend any illusion that flatters self–love or group–consciousness. We have seen great nations losing every shred of honour, all sense of humour, the very idea of decency and fair play."
  The elements of the book that I rather enjoyed were the explanation of the cheat vs the spoil-sport. The Cheat plays the game, but may do so unfairly through bending the rules or gaining some advantage. Meanwhile, the spoil-sport breaks the illusion of the game, typically by pointing out the magic circle inadvertently, typically by ignoring the rules entirely.
	  This actually helps put into context something that I touched upon last week, when I was somewhat ruminating over how communicating ideas can get messy. Specifically, it does provide a decent explanation of why some conversations get so heated so quickly. In a way, the conversation was a bit of a game happening between us, but one of us spoiled the game for the other.
		  A personal example, a conversation I had with a family member regarding flag burning, where it very quickly turned into accusations of disrespecting our family lineage because I disagreed with them.
  There was also several sections that dealt with how international law presents a new form of competition between nations, and how the new rules take precedence over the old forms of warfare. Yet, the whole system is a bit precarious, especially when members of a particular nation decides to flagrantly ignore the system of international law, which is also "spoiling" the game
	  "Things have now come to such a pass that the system of international law is no longer acknowledged, or observed, as the very basis of culture and civilized living. As soon as one member or more of a community of States virtually denies the binding character of international law and, either in practice or in theory, proclaims the interests and power of its own group—be it nation, party, class, church or whatsoever else—as the sole norm of its political behaviour, not only does the last vestige of the immemorial play–spirit vanish but with it any claim to civilization at all. Society then sinks down to the level of the barbaric, and original violence retakes its ancient rights."
	  In the context of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, or the current Israel-Palestine Conflict, we can see how this line of reasoning appears. 'Either Russia or NATO or Hamas or Israel has blatantly ignored international law, and as such are just engaging in baseless violence' is a common talking point for either of these conflicts.
  Overall, I think there is some value in recognizing the play-element in culture, and how it's played an important role in establishing some of our first traditions and cultural artifacts. I also think that this book actually serves as a good companion to Nietzsche's *Genealogy of Morals*, as a big portion Nietzsche's work there was to explain the history of moral philosophy in the context of competitive forces, namely Slave and Master Morality. Homo Ludens gives a more anthropological record of how much of the early philosophy was more of a competitive game than anything else, with much of the seriousness coming in later eras of time, and how the play-element has become less and less important to robust philosophical debate. There's also good examples from other works of Nietzsche, such as this quote from Beyond Good and Evil:
	  "In fact, the philosopher has long been mistaken and confused by the multitude, either with the scientific man and ideal scholar, or with the religiously elevated, desensualized, desecularized visionary and God-intoxicated man; and even yet when one hears anybody praised, because he lives “wisely,” or “as a philosopher,” it hardly means anything more than “prudently and apart.” Wisdom: that seems to the populace to be a kind of flight, a means and artifice for withdrawing successfully from a bad game; but the GENUINE philosopher — does it not seem so to US, my friends? — lives “unphilosophically” and “unwisely,” above all, IMPRUDENTLY, and feels the obligation and burden of a hundred attempts and temptations of life — he risks HIMSELF constantly, he plays THIS bad game."

Though, I do believe that this is not really a good basis for analysis. Mind you, there have been flimsier bases used for analysis, especially media analysis. Hell, Huizinga even takes a good swipe at Marxism as a form of analysis, which I got a good chuckle out of.

"As a result of this luxation of our intellects the shameful misconception of Marxism could be put about and even believed, that economic forces and material interests determine the course of the world. This grotesque over-estimation of the economic factor was conditioned by our worship of technological progress, which was itself the fruit of rationalism and utilitarianism after they had killed the mysteries and acquitted man of guilt and sin. But they had forgotten to free him of folly and myopia, and he seemed only fit to mould the world after the pattern of his own banality."

Still, being able to extract the play-element from any particular situation might help give some insight. Earlier, I touched upon the idea that there is an underlying current of accusing others of "spoiling the game" in terms of international law and in personal conversations. And I'm sure there are ways to make those analyses more robust, such as asking What rules are being broken or What happens to rule-breakers in these scenarios. But, following down those would essentially lead me to outside the play-element itself. In the case of analyzing a conflict, I'd have to turn to International Law, or analyzing a personal conflict would make me turn to personal history and speculative psychology. As such, Homo Ludens doesn't radically shift one's ability to analyze the world into perfect clarity. But, it's another tool in the kit that may give me more angles to examine anything from.