# External Sources
[Wiki article for Robert O. Paxton](en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Paxton)
[I've Hesitated to Call Donald Trump a Fascist. Until Now | Opinion, Robert O. Paxton, Newsweek](newsweek.com/robert-paxton-trump-fascist-1560652)

# Key Takeaway
# Notes
## Chapter 1 Introduction
### The Invention of Fascism
- By the 20th century, the three major political philosophies that were in operation were conservatism, liberalism, and socialism.
	- In a very broad sense, conservatism and liberalism were both the popular mainstream political movements within a post French-Revolution Europe. Liberals often argued for "liberty, equality, and fraternity", often through a minimal government that simply held the economy and law from great danger. Conservatives often argued for a more capable government, which ensured good social order being established by elite institutions of church, universities, etc. Socialism, while well-known, was still searching for stable ground in many major nations, often taking smaller roles and parties.
- Fascism, as it is understood today, was not considered to be a working or theoretical political philosophy until the *fascismo* of Mussolini. As such, Marxists and socialists tended to believe that the general discontentment of the people would swing in their favor. Yet, writers like Tocqueville and Sorel noticed that there was a growing discontentment that did not appear to follow previous norms.
- The beginning of Mussolini's movement was a group of left-wing nationalists called *Fascio Rivoluzionario d'Azione Interventista*, which led to the term *fascismo* to describe the general mindset and mood of the movement.
- By 1919, the movement had declared that socialism, because it opposed nationalism, was its enemy. Moving forward, Mussolini's fascists took several points from socialist movements, and added them, almost secondarily, to the broader concept of nationalism, deeming their movement to be "national socialist".
- Yet, the majority of the people motivated to join the movement often had differing agendas. Pro-war syndicalists fought for a more militant approach to defeating capitalism, ex-soldiers who felt like they were owed power and prestige, and Futurists who sought a conquering future over remembering the past.
- Soon after establishing themselves, Mussolini's Fascists began to act, and seized power within 3 years. 11 years later, the Nazi party took over in Germany. Soon after World War 2, and a Europe that was mostly confused how it all happened.
- While nobody really knew how to classify Fascism, it was generally understood, even from the early days that this was something unique, and that it was powerful and tapped into something other political movements had missed.
- What makes defining Fascism so difficult is that there appears to be a general notion of the term and what it means, but that it can be and has been applied to a large number of movements that don't fully fit with the image. It's broad and nebulous enough that there are a number of people who believe the term is almost entirely useless.
### Images of Fascism
- There is a common trope of fascism(rallies, marches, charismatic leaders, militarization, etc.) that most people tend to rely on for judging what is and is not fascism. Yet, relying on the trope potentially leads to false ideas of how fascism operates, and how we can detect it. A charismatic leader is important, but not everything, and fervent support happened for some movements, but was not the norm.
- There's also other characteristics that will shift depending on time period or strength of the particular movement, such as Anti-Semitism or anti-capitalist ideas. These have appeared in movements, but not always in action, or not within the beginnings, or only at certain points.
- Paxton says that the book will examine both what fascists did and what they said, specifically pointing out when these two elements did not match up. For example, anti-capitalist rhetoric was prominent during the early days of Mussolini's campaign, but there were few actions his party took to dismantle previous structures. Instead, there was a broad movement to incorporate many of these previous structures into the state, given authority by state actors.
- Fascism has always had a sense of political ambiguity, in that it doesn't fit neatly into distinctions of left-right mapping. They often spoke poorly about and took action against socialists, liberals, and conservatives, and they often lamented "centrist" powers as being limp-wristed and ineffective.
- Fascism also has a hard time being properly defined in relation to modernity, as they would often shift policies regarding industrialization, globalization, and materialism. For example, early fascists would rally against industrialization, which would give them support among both displaced workers and critical intellectuals. Yet, when in power, they would often utilize heavy industrialization to maintain that power and shift to war making capability.
- A good example of how difficult it is to categorize this is with the mass murder of Jews and other groups. While the act itself appeared to reject modernist ideas of morality and rationalism, it utilized massive industrial structures and capabilities to carry out the large scale extermination. It was both a rejection and embracing of different parts of modernity.
- Focusing on the tropes of fascism also obfuscates the more mundane aspects of fascist everyday life, including how the average person saw themselves under a fascist routine, and how they reacted to various events, violent and non-violent, by fascist members of the nation.
- Paxton waxes a bit on how definitions are never perfect by themselves, but does say that towards the end of the book, there will be a conceptual definition of fascism that can be used by most people.
### Strategies
- Given the number of disagreements that arise when trying to define fascism itself, Paxton wants to outlay the strategies needed to properly tackle the task.
- The first hurdle is the belief that fascism works as an ideology much like other "isms", such as communism, liberalism, and conservatism. The major problem with this approach is that there was no real agreed upon ideology of the disparate movements of fascism, with some early movements outright stating that the ideas were never the important aspect.
- Instead, there appeared to be more of an aesthetic that was decided upon by leaders, which centered around the idea of a people, ethnic group, or nation. Hence, while nationalism appeared in all forms of fascism, this presented differently depending on which nation was being discussed.
- This does not mean that any publication by fascists are to be dismissed, as both Mussolini and Hitler put forward plans and goals for their movements and nations. Rather, they can not be understood in isolation, but must be examined alongside the actions taken by the various groups.
- It also presents an interesting problem of properly identifying intellectual figures within fascist movements, as the particular rota of intellectuals could and would change depending on either the whims of the party, or by a falling out of individual members. Yet, they are still important to understanding the wider timeline of changes, and examining their arguments gives us plenty of information on the changes within fascism over time.
- The ideological portions of fascism also appear to be more concrete towards the end cycle of fascism, when the party tends to have the power to implement the particular whims of the leadership.
- Where studying ideology is weakest is during the middle portion of the cycle of fascism, when the majority of actions taken by a party or movement is about political maneuvering and power consolidation.
- There are also the disagreements regarding from what fascism grows out of, which leads us to require examining the soil where fascism tends to rise. Explanations range from a crisis in capitalism or a crisis in liberal society.
- Paxton argues that because of many of the points above, fascism is more disparate than other ideologies, because there is a rejection of every possible value. The only one that remains is what Paxton calls a "Darwinian struggle for primacy".
- Because of this, Paxton says that one of the strongest tools will be the possibility to compare different movements, while specifying what contrasts exist between different factions of fascism. By finding what is different between the movements, we can hope to find explanations for why those differences exist, which gives us a wider picture of what fascism allows.
### Where Do We Go from Here?
- Paxton reasserts and rejects the nominalist approach, which is to reduce the defining characteristic of fascism to only Mussolini's case, while calling all other movements their own thing(such as Nazism). To him, this removes the usefulness of the term fascism to properly capture a phenomenon of the popular movements that fight against both left and liberal movements.
- Paxton then explains the encyclopedic and essence approaches, in which scholars attempt to either capture all different variations as if in a bestiary, or to whittle the movements down to a defining core that is found among all of them. He then says that he will ignore these for now.
- Instead, he wishes to view the actions committed by the various movements under the label of fascism, to get a better picture of patterns there.
- Paxton then explains the rough outlines of both liberalism and conservatism. He believes that understanding these will also allow us to know why participants from both these groups have either worked with or against fascist movements at various times.
- He then lays out that he wishes to examine fascism in a cycle of five stages:
	1. The creation of movements
	2. Their rooting in the political system
	3. Their seizure of power
	4. The exercise of power
	5. The long duration in which the movement chooses either radicalization or entropy
- The advantage that Paxton sees from this approach is the possibility to compare different movements at different portions of the overall life cycle. It's especially useful to help determine what happened when one fails to make it to the next stage.
## Chapter 2 Creating Fascist Movements
- Paxton rejects the notion that fascism was properly started March 23, 1919, when Mussolini named his party. Instead, he goes through some of the conditions that were occurring within multiple Central European nations. 
- In Hungary, post WW1, the conditions were dire. The Hapsburg Empire had collapsed due to various nations claiming independence, leaving Hungary with roughly 30 percent of its original territory. It was also occupied by French, Serb, and Romanian armies among several large stretches of their remaining land. A socialist-communist movement began, which sought Budapest independence. A counterrevolution was formed, both with traditional elite and a new nationalist movement. That nationalist movement sought to create a new system that focused on popular nationalism, and espoused Anti-Semitic, Anti-Bolshevik, and xenophobic views. They eventually gained power under the new system of Hungarian conservatives.
- Austria, also part of the dissolution of the Hapsburg Empire, saw its own growth of working-class, pan-German nationalism. Most of these movements came to a head under Lueger's mayorship of Vienna. Many of Lueger's policies surrounded anti-Semitism, anticorruption, and defense of artisans. It was this movement that a young Adolf Hitler would be exposed to before his military career. This movement was eventually revived as the German National Socialist Workers' Party which introduced the swastika(Hakenkreuz).
- In Post-WW1 Germany, there were several groups that arose from disgruntled veterans of the war. While some took inspiration from Russia, a large portion turned towards nationalism, which was already popular from the war. Some of these movements would turn violent, killing off opposition leaders. Hitler, on command from Army Intelligence, was sent to research some of these movements. The German Workers' Party(DAP) especially caught his attention, and Hitler ended up joining them. He was soon given the task of DAP propaganda, and proved to be adept. The party was renamed to Nationalsozialistiche Deutsche Arbeiterpartei(Nazi party), Hitler introduced his 25 points for the party, and left the army, taking control of the newly minted group.
	- All of these, while sharing components with one another, grew almost entirely independently from the others. This is an important piece of info to break the narrative that Mussolini started fascism itself, with all other copying his approach.
### The Immediate Background
- The most important event in the creation of a space for fascism and fascist movements was World War 1, which impacted much of the underlying assumptions and conditions of culture, politics, and social status.
- Major factors for this change was the capability to re-route industrial powers to tackle war-time needs, to propagate propaganda to a new level, and levied criticisms against the liberal and socialist views of a bright future.
- The three major ideas that first responded to the aftermath of WW1:
	- Liberalism, which argued for national sovereignty and self-determination
	- Conservatism, which sought to bolster armed forces to ensure order
	- Socialism, in the style of Lenin, which wanted to establish a global socialist order overthrowing capitalism
- Fascism introduced a new approach, which had elements from others, but was a new breed of political agenda. They proposed strong armed forces, wanted self-determination for (the correct) nations through that force, and they wished to overthrow class struggle by wanting to incorporate the working class into a wider state class. Yet, the end goal was to create nations of the "master races", which would keep the "mongrelized" peoples in check.
### Intellectual, Cultural, and Emotional Roots
- This portion examines much of the underlying factors of fascism that had been stewing even prior to the Great War, such as anti-liberal movements, a rise in nationalism and racism, and new aesthetic changes.
- There was Nietzsche, who sought his Uber mensch to be strong, free individuals that created their own values. There was also Georges Sorel, who was a direct mentor to Mussolini and believed in syndicalism. Syndicalism generally focuses on union action as a form of worker unity and action, which would then become the force to potentially overthrow capitalism. Sorel dreamed of a large, unified union that would essentialize all into one big movement that would invigorate into overthrowing capitalism and replacing it as the primary economic power.
	- It should be noted here that Nietzsche influenced many people, from Mussolini to Foucault, so it's not as easy to say that there is a direct line. Especially when one remembers that Nietzsche was stringently opposed to Anti-semites and nationalists. Still, Mussolini and Hitler believed that they were successors of Nietzsche's ideas, so the connection is important to note. It's also been the most difficult aspect, personally, when attempting to defend Nietzsche's works.
- There was also the vitalization of Social Darwinism, which had existed prior to WW1, but was immensely bolstered during and afterwards.
- New economic and social pressures also stewed fears of the loss of community engagement and solidarity. Individualism promised that each person could be self-determinate, but potentially at the cost of community. With a growth in immigration, industrial power, and voting rights, there were those in the conservative community that feared the loss of elite power and social order. Sociologists also feared the supplanting of natural communities(villages, families, churches) with artificial ones in the effort to modernize.
- There was also the growing distrust of both those within and outside the nation. Immigration and refugees throughout the early 20th century produced fears in the corrupting nature of outsiders. The rise of socialists and intellectuals within the nation was looked at as something that drove corruption within.
- These lead to the demonization of groups within fascist movements, though which enemy it was would change depending on the particular movement and the conditions within that group. Germany focused on the Jews, Romani, and Slavs. American fascist movements would often target blacks. Italy focused on socialists and various African nations(Ethiopia and Libya).
- To this day, there is much debate on where Fascism sits within the intellectual history of Europe overall. There are those, such as Zeev Sternhell, who argued that Fascism was "an integral part of the history of European Culture." Meanwhile, there are others, such as Hannah Arendt, who argued that fascism does not find roots in European intellectual tradition, but may very well be a complete refutation of that tradition.
- Paxton argues that it's not too easy to stake fascism as directly connected to previous thinking. While there are threads one can find, there is no direct link of previous thought being bridged to fascist thought.
	- I'll again reference what I've said previously regarding Nietzsche. Fascists do love Nietzsche, but so do Antifascists, so it's impossible to say that Nietzsche directly inspired either group. Rather, it's more like algae within the pond. It'll change the Ph of the water, thus affecting the fish who eat algae and the fish that don't.
- The other difficulty is the variety that occurs in the myths and cultural bedrock that each fascist movement tends to assimilate. Italy appealed to traditional Roman imagery, while Germany adopted Norse myth.
- There is also the myriad number of people that would espouse ideas that were seemingly connected with the core tenets of a majority of fascist movements at the time, but would quickly dismiss those movements when others would attempt to create the connection.
- For Paxton, the more important aspect is to understand the emotional undercurrent than the intellectual one, as the growth of fascist movements is often only possible if there is a proper mood for that movement to seize upon. The intellectual should be understood, but it's not the most important factor.
### Long-Term Preconditions
- There were several preconditions of fascism within politics that gave space for the rise of fascism within the European sphere.
- The first was the broadening of the politically engageable citizens, mostly through vote reform that gave more people the chance to engage with their government. There were sufferage movements that proved successful in France and Germany, both by conservative leaders, that aimed to give more disenfranchised peoples a chance to vote. Though, much of this was political engineering to give the vote to those who opposed their opposition.
- Fascism, as a working principle, worked to engage and energize as many citizens as possible, as a way to legitimize their rule among the nation.
- There was also the growth of successful socialist movements within Europe, which meant a broader moderating force on those within positions of power. This led to a general split among those in the Left. There were those who became increasingly disenfranchised by socialism overall, which sought answers to combat the rise of socialism. And there were those who grew disappointed with the more moderate socialists, who then looked for more radical movements, either in Bolshevism or national syndicalism(which often led to supporting fascism).
- The last great precondition came at the success of the Bolshevik movement in Russia, which posed a threat to both conservative and liberal movements within Europe overall. Liberal institutions especially took a massive hit in the wave of WW1, with economies appearing to run down, education losing power, and political elites appearing ineffective on the world stage.
### Precursors
- Paxton fingers the 1880s as a particular decade that laid some groundwork for fascism to pull from during its growth.
- The first of these was the rise of globalization within the economic sphere, where cheaper and more powerful transportation disrupted traditional markets and promoted more favor towards heavy industrialization. This was in addition to a massive uptick in immigration to Western European States.
- Once again, the expansion of the electorate within France, Germany, and Britain, which shifted the profile of both the voting class and those who actively participated within political life, including much of the middle class.
- This also gave rise to the first professional politicians, who lived primarily on the salary of being part of parliament. Lacking many of the social networks of their predecessors, many of them turned towards new groups, including social clubs and unions.
- Some of those unions began to turn towards nationalistic policies, as they would argue that excluding people from other nations would strengthen the position of their own workers. 
- Though, it was far more than unions that began to be part of larger populist movements that favored nationalism. In France, there were considerable forces, both Monarchists and Bonapartists, who would fund populist figures against the French Republic, especially General Boulanger and Charles Maurras.
- New forms also began to take shape within political life, as frustrations grew with both socialist and liberal politicians. The populist nationalism would begin to mix with both liberal and socialist forms, creating both capitalist and anticapitalist forms of populist nationalism. Yet, the anticapitalist populist nationalists were among the more numerous, and showed viable precursors to the fascists that would follow them when conditions were right.
- Paxton also makes the argument that the Ku Klux Klan was the first proto-fascist movement in 1867. The establishment of violent action against the main powers, in order to restore the previous social order, and often directed towards groups perceived to be degenerate. While possibly not fully fascist, it does show shockingly similar parallels, enough to consider them among the first possible fascists.
- Paxton does note that these would not be ways for these early movements to be understood at the time. Prior to the Post-War Europe, there was no concept of fascism, so each of these proto-movements would be seen as their own distinct entities. It's only with hindsight that we realize that they signaled a wider shift in the wind that would eventually lead to fascism.
### Recruitment
- There were several surprising groups that fascists were able to find support in, especially for the time.
- The first of these were the youth, who saw fascism as a way to fight back against the older generations and their previous policies.
	- On a personal note here, this makes me recall a particular conversation I had in a sociology class, where the professor proclaimed that one of our greatest strengths was that the youth were always a hope for progressive movements(in which she meant Left and Far Left movements). Apparently, she caught me shaking my head and asked me if I disagreed. I said that I'd seen enough youth join the MAGA movement to believe that they didn't care about a principle being good by itself, Rather, they appeared more prone to extreme rhetoric that focused on invigoration and emotion than a truly rational approach to policy. Reading this section felt like it validated a bit of my objection.
- The majority of those that supported the fascist movements were middle to lower-middle class citizens. Though, most parties find their largest base among the middle class, so it's unclear whether this is entirely unique.
- There was also a decent number of those who joined from the working class. Yet, they would often be those who didn't already have loyalty to socialist movements, which made up the majority of the working class at the time. There was also a significant portion of the unemployed that moved to fascism, but typically from new voters or middle class unemployed.
- 