# External Sources:
- [Evaluating Information: The Cornerstone of Civic Online Reasoning](https://purl.stanford.edu/fv751yt5934) A study conducted by the author to evaluate students' capabilities of determining the reliability of online sources and information.
- [Civic Learning Week 2023: Opening Forum: Preparing Students for Digital Democracy](https://youtu.be/xsL_g1XmyR4?si=bF_8gVi7Soh1hExf&t=9268) Mostly focused on media literacy within the digital age, with some focus on new technologies such as AI and deepfakes.
- [Civic Learning Week 2024: National Forum: How Disinformation (including AI) Impacts Civic Learning and What We Can Do](https://www.youtube.com/live/LsX7SWPRirA?si=9VoGGRicDAc4RVZ4&t=2352)
# Key Takeaway:
# Notes:
## Introduction
- The chapter starts with an example of a textbook that gained national interest, specifically because it featured information regarding battalions of black soldiers operating on the side of the Confederacy during the Civil War. Further examination of the claims, when the author was asked, showed that they came from a highly biased group with no primary sourcing to back the claim.
- The author then references a study that they were involved with(linked above), which sought to evaluate students' capabilities of determining the reliability of online sources and information.
- Another example is given of [teachers in Rialto, California that implemented a test for students to determine whether the Holocaust actually occurred](https://www.sbsun.com/2014/05/04/exclusive-rialto-unified-defends-writing-assignment-on-confirming-or-denying-holocaust/), citing sources from anti-Semitic websites. Students subsequently argued for the Holocaust being a hoax, as they couldn't tell which sources were legitimate.
	- As a side note, the article above mentions that the superintendent for the school district had the name "Mohammad Z. Islam" which sounded like the fakest name one could create for a caricature of either a Muslim or an Arab person, but they are [actually a real person](https://www.sbsun.com/2014/07/27/despite-scandals-rialto-unifieds-interim-superintendent-wants-to-keep-job/). [LA Times article mentioning them again](https://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-rialto-holocaust-assignment-20140507-story.html).
- The author stresses that much of this wasn't directly because of racism or insensitivity. Rather, it's a symptom of the current information age producing too much information for people to properly parse. Specifically, we don't have the tools to deal with too much information.
- They then conclude the intro by explaining the overview of the parts within the book, and the point of each particular part and chapter.
## Part 1 Our Current Plight
### Chapter 1
- Much of the first portion of this chapter goes through both the history of surveys conducted to determine average historical knowledge among several different groups, then talking about the media reporting on the response, including some extreme statements of the massive degradation of historical knowledge as a result of educational failure.
- The point of these examples was to show how the problem is not as simple as was reported. Rather, historical ignorance tends to be rather stable overall, with each generation having similar problems with retaining historical data.
- Instead, Wineburg places much of the burden upon the methodology of test-makers and examiners, in that they are specifically looking to create a normal distribution of performers. This is done by eliminating questions that are either universally answerable or universally unanswerable.
- There are some explanations and sources given for how standardized testing is created, and how it deviates towards the creation of questions that could not be answered by the majority of students.
	- I won't lie, but I'm getting a bit queasy about this. The last group, that I was directly involved with, that had these complaints regarding "standardized testing" was a group of radical evangelists that argued for policies such as jailing those who burned the flag and the establishment of a Christian theological government. They also fell into the group of those known as "unschoolers", which finds a direct lineage with writers such as John Holt, who argued for adult-child sexual relationships, and Ayn Rand.
	- This is not to say that I'm against the overall point. I do acknowledge that there are drawbacks to any form of "standardization", as the complexity of any system can not be fully encapsulated within strict bounds, and this is especially true for a field as complex as education. And, there is a decent amount of data to suggest that the objectives of test-makers does not properly align with educators. Yet, I'm hoping that the author does specify the difference between testing in-and-of-itself, and the utilization of poor testing models. The previous group could not understand the distinction.
- The next portion speaks about how the actual logic behind test-takers is not the same as either test-makers nor educators. Several examples are given of how a lack of historical knowledge can still lead to the correct answer, because there are several methods of utilizing inductive logic to determine the "most correct" answer.
	- This is almost exactly from John Holt's "Instead of Education", of which the central claim is that schools teach children how to take tests, and the subsequent criticism of "test logic", instead of internalizing information. I'm beginning to lose confidence here.
- The next portion then talks about the particular pedagogy of classroom education, as well as the problems that plague textbook creation. Specifically, the overwhelming problem of classroom history education is "boring" for students, and it continues to be. In addition, the committees for textbooks are often infiltrated by outside influences that have damaging agendas, especially in the direction of religious interests.
	- Alright, there is no way this guy wasn't influenced in one way or another by the homeschooling movement of the 1970s, which was spearheaded by people like Holt. Almost all of these points were circulated within the magazine set forward by the group, especially "Growing Without Schooling", of which the first copy came out in 1977. The majority of these magazines were constructed around personal stories of parents, most of which liked to use the words "bored", or "dull" to describe the effect that education had on their children. There are also multiple references to the textbooks being "authoritarian" and "dull". I'm almost out of good faith for this book.
-  It should be noted that the majority of examples regarding testing here is multiple choice tests, where the next section talks about the technology behind multiple choice exams. There's also the line "That a Depression-era technology still shapes the tests we give to students is a national shame". Guess we need to throw out Radar, Synthetic Rubber, and the expansion of messaging networks, all of which came out within the same era.
### Chapter 2
- The beginning portion of the chapter focuses on the campaign to make history its own subdivision within the Department of Education, which succeeded in 2000 mostly through the advocacy by Robert C. Byrd, the senator.
- A significant portion is devoted to the work done by the American Council of Trustees and Alumni(ACTA), which the author levies some arguments of bias against, including that they went after such figures as Reverend Jesse Jackson for "Anti-American sentiments".
- The next major focus is on the Teaching American History(TAH) program, which gave grant money to various local programs in order to improve the content and efficacy of American History education
- Essentially, the rest of the chapter is built around examining the shortcomings of TAH, and how much of the funds were used for causes that were not realized.
	- I won't lie, some of the good faith has been restored, though it was a bit touch-and-go there. The first chapter really made me worry that I would have to deal with a pure ideologue for the rest of the book. I'm now understanding that the overall claim is not "schooling is bad", but that "specific pedagogical approaches are bad". More specifically, I'm assuming at this point that the conclusion of the book is more "We must teach students to think historically, and most approaches have sucked at this". Which, sure, yes, that is a much more reasonable position than the first chapter led me to believe.
### Chapter 3
- Wineburg introduces the textbook *A People's History of the United States* by Howard Zinn, which has a complicated history itself of going from fringe textbook to mainstream. While there is some space here to examine its impact, Wineburg is more focused on the question of how the textbook teaches people to think historically.
- Wineburg then spends the next section criticizing the particular approach that Zinn took in constructing a narrative, specifying the use of cherry-picked anecdotes while ignoring data that may go against the narrative. A portion is dedicated to the approach of "yes-type" questions of history, where one seeks to find evidence to supply a pre-built narrative.
- The next section details how this approach manifested within the text through questions posed to readers. Particularly, readers are asked "yes/no" or "either/or" questions that skew towards only one answer, leading the reader down to one specific conclusion.
- The next section focuses on the selective removal of information, and how that utilizes the potential ignorance of the reader. In particular, Zinn makes a comparison of Nazi bombing campaigns during a selective portion of WW2 while ignoring other campaigns that were far more devastating, typically by design. Zinn compares the smaller bombing campaigns to bombing campaigns of the Allies which were far more devastating, but also occurred years apart, removing the context of how the overall situation changed over the course of the war.
- The next section focuses on the Zinn's narrative regarding the use of the Atomic bomb on Japan. In particular, much of the basis of Zinn's argument relied on entirely using secondary sources which often quoted secondary sources, which led to primary sources either becoming fabricated or highly misrepresented.
- There is also the incorrect use of counterfactuals. A historian will often use counterfactuals to deal with potential histories that did not occur, though there is no certainty to the outcome, and so there is often a hedging of the bet. Zinn states with clear confidence that the Japanese *would* have surrendered if they had been given one condition, with no proper references to back the claim.
- The next portion examines Zinn's approach to the 1950s Red Scare era of American History. Zinn roundly condemned HUAC as being frivolous and dangerous, stating that the beliefs behind their conception were unfounded. Wineburg counters this by providing evidence from both Soviet archives opened in 1992, especially those of Program Venona.
- What alarms Wineburg about Zinn's book is its popularity, and how it managed to not effectively move students towards historical thinking than past textbooks. Instead, it offered the same approach of absorbing a monolithic narrative of history without teaching students to properly analyze the historical context.
	- Alright, good faith fully restored. With all three chapters, it's clear that Wineburg is concerned about wider pedagogical approaches to history. This especially clears up the basis for why he vehemently opposed multiple choice testing. Holt's foundation for his criticisms of educational institutions were that they were evil organizations that sought to control and brainwash students, which he saw as part of a wider issue of youth empowerment and freedom. It's clear that Wineburg is concerned with how the testing tells us nothing about a student's capability to perform actual historical analysis, which he sees as a wider issue of education failing to teach historical thinking. Wineburg is not lambasting education itself, but how ineffective it has been. Very different levels of criticism.
## Part 2 Thinking Historically != An Amazing Memory
### Chapter 4
- The main focus on this chapter is on the popularity and problems that revolve around the educational taxonomy of Benjamin Samuel Bloom. Specifically, in the time after WWII, education within the US was looking for better plans to approach curriculum. Bloom, having inherited the task, led his team to create the Taxonomy.
- The general scheme is that of a pyramid, with each layer building upon the one underneath it. Those layers, in order, are: Knowledge -> Understanding -> Application -> Analysis -> Synthesis -> Evaluation.
- The schema became quite popular, with several examples of school districts attempting to build curriculums to best follow the pattern. 
- Wineburg, however, believes that the particular approach can lead to some holes in critical thinking, especially in terms of history. He goes through several examples of presenting a 1892 proclamation by President Benjamin Harrison, announcing "Discovery Day", which was a one-time observed holiday during that year.
- One response was recorded by an AP student named Jacob. His response was given to teachers to evaluate, and it was almost universally praised for contextualizing the speech with knowledge regarding Columbus in 1492. When asked of college students, more emphasis was placed on modern political ideas and trends being applied to the speech.
- One student, however, first noted that the document was written in 1892, four hundred years after Columbus, and then noticed it wasn't front page news. After that, he began to question what was occurring at the time that the document had been created.
- Wineburg then explains some of the historical context for why the document was important for understanding the political climate *at the time*.
- Contrasting the answers given by Jacob and by the graduate students, the particular approaches reveal how the taxonomy doesn't necessarily work for historical thinking. Jacob answered using knowledge he had, which appeared to be a great answer, but did not reveal anything worthwhile about the document itself. The graduate students first asked to create context surrounding the time that the document was made, but often leapt towards applying out-of-time ideas to the motivations, thus missing important details.
- Overall, the usage of knowledge as a base in history is the wrong approach. Rather, one must learn to ask how to ask the right questions which can lead to knowledge. In this sense, Wineburg believes that the pyramid should be flipped upside-down.
	- This was an interesting chapter overall. I believe I'm getting a better appreciation for what Wineburg is trying to argue regarding historical thinking. While most people might see good history as being able to apply facts to a particular problem, it essentially boils history down to treating it like trivia. It's just memorizing facts enough that one can recite a "correct" answer. Instead, Wineburg wants people to view history as an inquisitive field, in which we are consistently asking questions, extracting knowledge to answer those questions, and then asking more questions. 
### Chapter 5:
- The next chapter focuses on a speech, which Wineburg provides in full, given by George Washington regarding the establishment of a one-time Thanksgiving holiday in 1789. The speech itself is often among the chief pieces of evidence that contemporary religious leaders point towards in order to argue for Washington's Christian beliefs. This is often done to push an argument regarding the intentions of the founding fathers as promoting the United States as a Christian nation.
- As a way to understand the potential interpretations of the speech, Wineburg and his colleague Gottlieb conducted a survey among 16 individuals. There were 4 clergy and religious educators, 4 bench scientists who identified as atheist or agnostic, 4 religious historians, and 4 non-religious historians.
- The 8 that were not historians all agreed that the speech proved that Washington was a deeply religious person, yet they deviated on whether this was for the better or not. The clergy praised Washington for being pious and acknowledging Christian values within government, while the scientists condemned him for potentially ruining the division between church and state.
- The historians, however, did not find the same conclusions. Rather, they examined the particular language that was used. More importantly, they noticed what language Washington did not use, but would have been expected of him if he were specifying one particular faith.
- Wineburg offers some historical background regarding Washington, and that the topic of his faith was a highly contested fact, even when he was alive. Often he would write and speak about his beliefs in such a way as to be non-sectarian.
- Wineburg then associates the approach given by the clergy and the scientists with a popular approach called "close reading" within schools. In "close reading," the student is encouraged to read and re-read a document, devoid of its context, to provide an interpretation of the text.
	- This was actually popular in my old classrooms, so I've had some familiarity with this approach.
- Wineburg criticizes this approach when it comes to understanding history specifically, as the entire point of history is to understand the context of any particular information. In history, facts can not exist by themselves entirely, like they can in math or science. Therefore, history should be looking to teach students to create those connections, rather than sever them.
	- And I believe that's the full picture of Wineburg's explanation of historical thinking. And I must say that I find it to be among one of the more straightforward explanations of some of the frustrations I've found with conversations I've had about past events. To go with one that is still fresh in my mind, there is the tendency to remember single facts regarding one political event, while dismissing the cobweb of information that gives new meaning to that fact. For example, Jan. 6th, in which there are still many that say that Trump can not be held liable because of one line given during a speech that lasted over 45 minutes. Or that the other events, such as calling senators during the riot to pressure them, is entirely unconnected to the main riot itself.
## Part 3: Thinking Historically in a Digital Age
### Chapter 6
- The chapter begins with explaining some of the history of the National Science Foundation, and how it, at one point in its history, created curriculum for the social sciences. Yet, due to a growth of controversy regarding some of the points of the curriculum, the NSF ceased the program in 1976.
- Wineburg is then approached by a member of NSF, receiving praise for his approach to historical analysis, and it is subtly hinted that they would be willing to accept a curriculum proposal from him. Wineburg and Herrenkohl, a colleague of his, put together a proposal asking for $50,000 in funding to create the curriculum. They received nearly a million.
- After recruiting two more compatriots, Wineburg and his team put focus on a handful of schools in Washington, calling the project PATHS. Their main first goal was to break through stereotypical conceptions of how history was approached by historians.
- To that end, they set their first project on the history of Pocahontas, as the Disney movie had recently released. Students were each given an "Archive Bin" filled with historical documents related to the story that was present in their textbooks. They were asked to compare and contrast the information given within the textbook with information from the documents.
- In addition to this, students were tasked with given group presentations related to one of the topics of the class. The students were tasked with attempting to answer a handful of questions, utilizing the documents within their presentation.
	- The particular example given by Wineburg was a presentation on Rosa Parks, in which contradictory interpretations were given by several students, which resulted in heated argumentation. What Wineburg found most impressive about this was that the students would, after several months learning to lean on primary documents, instinctively reach towards finding some evidence to either bolster or dissuade specific answers.
- In the end, Wineburg found the test run to be a success. Students found the projects to be interesting, which led to positive viewpoints on studying history as a subject.
- In the end, the program itself was shown to be a success, but worries existed whether it could be implemented on a wide-scale.
- After finishing with the program, Wineburg was contacted by another colleague of his who managed the most popular website for teaching historical analysis to college students(this was during the early 1990s, when website creation and maintenance was still unknown to the vast majority of people, even academics).
- Work was started shortly after to create a website that would provide the same service for high-school students. Much of the project turned out to be overly complicated for the time, and there was modest interest in the project. It even went on to receive the James Harvey Robinson Award for innovation. Yet, nothing much came from it in the end.
- In 2002, Wineburg conducted a series of experiments with teaching cadets to gauge what they consider to be good historical thinking. The most surprising result from the experiment was a large portion of students that felt like looking at the source of the document was "cheating", with some even refusing to know.
- Expanding on the realization, Wineburg helped a PhD student of his, Abby, put together a curriculum for students to learn to read texts like a historian. Abby decided to take the program as far as it could go, and decided to try and implement it within an urban schooling environment. At that point, there was very little faith that they would succeed.
- Implementing what they learned with PATHS, they took the state mandated curriculum, then integrated a basic timeline of events and original documentation that gave new, often contradictory, information. Over the course of several lessons, students learned to approach historical narratives with a more ambiguous lens, treating each story as one potential part of the wider whole.
- In the end, the students began to outperform their peers both in other classes, and on state testing. Taking several videos with enthusiastic students, they presented the program to state officials, who asked for a website to be made detailing the approach.
- Originally, the site was a very simple page which led to download links for teachers to access program materials, notes, and plans. Within a year, it had become one of the most visited sites for education, with over 200,000 downloads.
- The next step was to focus on how to properly assess historical thinking. Over a period of time, several innovations, such as the project to digitize the vast majority of the Library of Congress and changes in short-form test questions, began to break down the barriers of testing to mesh with the previous innovations.
	- This is the longest chapter yet, and it just keeps going!!!!!
- In the end, Wineburg was recognized for his innovations in history education. He was given tenure, and had been told by several professors that he "changed the field". To Wineburg, however, the problems that plague education overall are still far too big to take his innovations as truly a full dent within the system. And these were in the early days of the Internet, which the next chapter focuses on.
### Chapter 7
- The focus of this chapter is on how historical thinking needs to adapt to the digital age. It begins by placing focus on newer generations, which have the appearance of having deep literacy with digital tools. Yet, this does not appear to hold up to scrutiny when examined, often finding that students were quick to accept top level responses to searches, trusting the Search Engine to produce the correct information. This goes in the opposite direction of historical analysis.
- A small note is made that there is also no apparent connection to technological access and competency in subjects. Some programs limit technological usage and access, but have better results.
- Noting that the idea came from his doctoral advisor Shulman, Wineburg then produces a potential link between historical thinking and a broader system of processing information in a highly social world. He then catalogs some of his studying into the subject, including speaking to several experts of online interaction and usage. Eventually, he was told that he would need to fill in some gaps himself.
- Working with Sarah, a research assistant of his, they began to search for those who proved to be very successful in the digital age, in a hope to figure out what separated them from the average searcher. Most of their first attempts proved to be circular, with one actually referring back to Wineburg's own research.
- Finding little in capturing search and research behavior online, Wineburg put together his own experiment. Two websites were presented to academics. While both were similar upon first appearance and focused on similar topics, background information would reveal a deep rift between the two in approach, ideals, academic rigor, and reliability.
- Surprisingly, a majority of academics did not detect much of a difference between the two sources, with more than half believing the unreliable source to be just as or more reliable than the vetted academic source.
- The largest contributor to this is what is called "negative transfer", in which a strategy used elsewhere is transferred to use elsewhere, but is insufficient in the new environment. In the case of academics, this was the typical strategy of rigorous reading of the source itself, which inevitably treated both the reliable and unreliable source as similar sources of potential academic standing unless signaled otherwise.
- These results prompted Wineburg and Sarah to seek out professional fact-checkers to see their methodology when approaching the same problem. In contrast with academics, the fact-checkers were far more adept at determining which website was the reliable source and which was to be avoided, despite its appearance.
- The primary difference between the two approaches was the readiness in utilizing outside sources and in finding background information. The majority of fact-checkers employed "lateral reading", in which the primary websites were contrasted with information found in other sources. Many looked to Wikipedia and the references there, in order to contrast between what is said on the websites, allowing them to more easily sniff out language that was either obfuscating or deceptive.
- The remainder of the chapter then explains in detail how these problems manifest among students and general populations. Unreliable sources will often give the appearance of propriety, and therefore become popular resources for people. In a vicious cycle, poor fact-checking leads to building upon flawed foundational ideas. There are those who are trying to create curriculums that deal with these changes, but many of these efforts, in Wineburg's opinion, do not go far enough to deal with the problem in its entirety. 
## Part 4 Conclusion: Historical Hope
### Chapter 8
- In asking a majority of students who counts as some of the most famous Americans, there is a surprising number of students that name figures like Martin Luther King Jr., Rosa Parks, and Harriet Tubman. Comparisons between those answers and the answers of older generations found a surprising amount of overlap.
- Among the hopeful aspects of these answers is the importance placed among African-Americans within American History itself, which may have been seen as impossible two generations ago.
- Although this is a positive change, we should also be weary of those left behind by history. Examples given by Wineburg: Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Cesar Chavez, Pocahontas, and Upton Sinclair.
- For the most part, it shows that the foundations of American mythology are still alive and well, but that what we look towards as defining characters within that sphere is ever changing. And, the fact that students turn to figures in history before pop stars is a good sign for our future.
## Afterword
- Wineburg argues that technology has fundamentally changed our relationship with many facets of our lives, and it should not surprise us that this holds true for history and history education. We can web search any piece of information we want. Yet, we don't have many of the strategies necessary to deal with it.
- There is also the issue of schooling often following older strategies of education, which ignores the overall impact of a continually connected world, and doesn't teach students to deal with these growths.
- In addition, the amount of poor or purposefully misleading information is growing, not shrinking. Therefore, education must take on the challenge of tackling the problem head-on.
# Notable Quotes: