# Information
Author: John Morris Roberts, Oxford Fellow and Tutor. Most well known for his role as professor of History and as the writer and presenter of the BBC series "The Triumph of the West"
# Key Takeaway
# Notes
## Book One: Heritages
### Chapter 1: Bedrock
- Much of the early portion of this chapter focused on the geographical reality of the European continent, and the climate that would have affected the early settlers.
	- Roberts does make a note that geography is not purely a determinant of how civilizations develop, which is a point I've heard argued elsewhere. Rather, how peoples use the geography, and even shape it, such as deforesting campaigns, requires the background information.
- The biggest factors that Roberts identifies is the location of the continent in relation to the seas and oceans, and the placement of mountains and the valleys that allow passage. All of these help us understand the movements of people throughout the history of the continent, and what routes were most easily accessible before changes made by Europeans.
- Roberts notes that there is the question "Where does Europe end in the East?", and that it is a question that continually pops up throughout the history of the Continent.
	- Given the questions regarding EU membership for both Turkey and Georgia, this is still an ongoing question
- A short section explains the very early settlers and their potential physiology. Most important, they would have already begun basic tool making and tribal association, and possibly some of the first parts of cultural identity with early religious thoughts and ritual.
- The first major hurdle of civilization, agriculture, was widespread in Europe around 4000 BC. It's noted that this is slightly later than elsewhere in the world, likely due to the effects of glaciation within Europe slowing down human interactions with plantlife. It's also contested how agriculture came into being, either as a necessity or as a curiosity.
- Due to the abundance of resources, Metallurgy developed early and quickly within Europe, giving the settlers there a large step forward during the Neolithic age.
- Prior to the development of writing systems and a literate civilization, there are several early markers of widespread communication and civilization building. There were complex networks of early commerce, in which goods would be shipped, manufacturing, and re-shipped. There are also networks of Megalithic structures, some of which predate those found on other continents.
- The first major cradle of civilization within Europe was within the Aegean Sea. Crete had developed it's own state, and participated in trade with neighbors such as Egypt, leading to the first structured state with an administration that relied on literacy and agriculture. It was eventually conquered by early Greek speakers, who appeared to take much of what they learned back to the mainland.
- There was also large groups from various linguistic families surrounding the Aegean, including the first Greek speakers called Achaeans, a warrior people that conquered much of the original Greece.
### Chapter 2: Ancient Greece
- Among European civilizations, the Greeks are the first in which there is a massive amount of information for us to understand and study through massive archeological sites and preserved writings. Though, much of this is also because of Rome, which did much to preserve many of the ideas and cultures of the original Greece.
### Chapter 3: The Making of the Roman World
- The first major group on the Italian Peninsula were the Etruscans, who were a loosely organized grouping of cities ruled by kings. They were literate, and organized large military groups.
- With the spattering of Greek colonies, many of the Latin cities adopted Greek writing and culture through trade, eventually transforming them into something more Latin.
- Around 500 BC many of the Latin cities ousted their kings, rejecting the overall rule of the Etruscans, and became independent.
- In the third century BC, the Macedonians, under Philip II, developed the phalanx formation, and conquered what was previously the Greek city states, making a larger state that ruled over the Greek peninsula and portions of the Anatolia.
- Philip's son, Alexander the Great, expanded this empire through the Middle East, into Egypt, and to the Punjab region just past the Indus River. This conquest spread Greek ideas, culture, and writings to a vast portion of the world. Much of this, after his death, became known as the "Hellenistic World".
- After the death of Alexander, much of the territories he conquered fractured into various empires and kingdoms, often with local successors wresting control from potential rivals. Yet, there were several leftovers from the conquest, such as the spreading of the Greek language, unifying many of the peoples with a common, though not native, language. This also allowed for greater cooperation between various communities such as the growing group of scientific and mathematical experts, such as Archimedes and Euclid.
- The early foundational Rome prior to the 3rd century was a small republic, in which a handful of property owners had the capability to choose policy. For the most part, they stayed around Rome, and moved to expand through the peninsula than into the rest of the Mediterranean.
- The First Punic War between Rome and Carthage, ending in 241 BC, turned Rome into a naval power and gave them control of Sicily, Corsica, and Sardinia, the first overseas territories to be acquired.
- The Second Punic War, when the Carthaginians held the Iberian peninsula, was when Hannibal led the march into Italy, occupying much of the Roman territory. After 12 years, the Romans managed to fight back and drive out the Carthaginians, reclaiming their territory. The Roman general Scipio pursued the fleeing forces all the way to Africa, and eventually defeated Hannibal at Zama, ending the war.
- The Third Punic War in 149 BC spelled the end of Carthage, and signaled a strong Rome throughout the Mediterranean.
- Soon after, realizing that conquest could be profitable, Rome began serious campaigns of conquest, managing to take much of Western Europe and moving into Anatolia. Much of this also resulted in the assimilation of the Hellenistic world and ideas. Changes in culture, education, and governance began to take shape.
- While expansion continued, the cracks started to form in the Republic. Poverty expanded for some who were conscripted into fighting, while the wealthy expanded their influence and land. The political class began to expand, with rough dynasties beginning to form among governors and statesmen. The Army became a professional fighting force, with many signing up for pay or citizenship.
- The republic ultimately fell when Caesar conducted civil war within Rome, defeating generals on the battlefield and winning over politicians within the senate. Eventually, he was made dictator for life until he was murdered in 44 BC.
- Julius' son Octavian continued his campaign, killing his murderers and continuing to chase down potential rivals for power. He centralized much of the republican powers under his rule, and then became Caesar Augustus. Setting up a dynasty, the name Caesar ruled for several generations after Augustus.
- While all this was happening, there was also the absorption of Judea into the empire. Over time, there appeared a far reaching Jewish Diaspora within the Roman Empire, laying much of the groundwork for a fervent religious conversion.
- Then, came Jesus, who overturned much of the Jewish world into a new religious fervor that became a historical force within the world. Particularly, the new Christians broke apart from previous Jewish traditions and began preaching to the Gentiles. St. Paul was among the first major missionaries of Christianity, and managed to spread the religion across wide areas of the Mediterranean.
- Possibly one of the biggest contributing factors was Paul's ability to translate much of the ideas from Hebrew into Greek, managing to mix the teachings in with philosophical concepts from the area, making it more palatable to many Roman citizens.
### Chapter 4: 