#### Changes:
- Graduated and have my associate's degree in Philosophy
	- Going back to the East Coast, which I'm excited for
- Currently not working, and using my savings between now and August
	- Overall plan is to get everything in place for when I transfer across the country.
	- Part of that is to increase my studying, as it's fallen off a bit since I started college
	- Part of that is to be more focused on my other outlets, such as writing and making content

#### Points of Interest:
- Under Paris
	- Cons:
		- The mayor character is about as cliched as you can get
		- CG can be a bit noticable
		- The explanations for rapid changes in behavior and physiology are a bit wack.
	- Pros:
		- Acting and cinematography was pretty good
		- When the shark attacks happen, they're just good gory fun.
		- The ending is a bit dour, which is actually quite rare in this sort of movie.
		- Might introduce some people to other french offerings available on Netflix
			- Marianne
			- Marseille
			- Lupin
			- Black Spot
- Obsidian
	- Learning it as a tool, and it's been quite robust.
	- It's been useful in keeping notes related to projects I'm working on, as well as keeping various portions organized under a broader umbrella.
	- Also is helping to keep me on track with some of what I hope to do, with my folders and links proving to be useful for knowing what connects to what
- The Vory by Mark Galeotti
	- About a fifth in, and it's been a very informative read
	- Going through the sources have also led to more sources, which is always a positive to me.
	- It seems like a good introduction to some of the ideas I've been hoping to dive into, though that's about it.
	- Still, compared to other books I've had to read for college, the sourcing and flow are much better
	- Generally a good start on my dive into Russian history and Russian crime networks.