# Intro
Opening portion from Eastern Promises
# Foreword
Hello, and welcome to another attempt for me to understand this crazy world. For this week, I decided to read *The Vory* by Mark Galeotti, who has done extensive work in studying Russia's history and examined it's place within international relations and security. Though, this book dealt with a particular pet interest of his, and, I will admit, of mine, which is the history and impact of organized crime within Russia. Overall, the book attempts to explain what makes Russian criminal networks unique, and why they appear to be so influential within modern Russian life.

Now, I will stress that this is not a particularly deep exploration of the ideas of the book, nor is this a robust examination of the Russian criminal underworld. Rather, these are some main takeaways I got from the book, mostly to reinforce my reading. Afterwards, I'll also link in some of what I've learned with interesting portrayals in media, especially Hotel Moscow in the show Black Lagoon. I will say that the show is confusingly accurate, which is to say that it's clearly a mythologized version of Russian criminals, but many of those myths do come from historical precedence.

As is though, if you do want a more robust breakdown, I have linked my notes within the description, which contains my thoughts as I was reading, a group of quotes I found relevant, and two different lectures given by Galeotti, the author. Still, let's start with Part one of the book.
# The Vory
## Part 1 - Foundations
Many of the foundations of the modern Russian criminal are actually much more recent than some other groups within the world, including many of the mafia groups that operate in Japan, Sicily, or even the United States. Though, there is plenty of history regarding the бандиты, or bandits of Tsarist Russia. Many of these were typically small bandit groups that would either roam the countryside or operate out of small townships for basic racketeering rings. Every now and again, there would be a more robust network created to ship stolen goods down the Volga, the largest river in Russia and Europe, but they were often temporary.
Where these bandit groups started to gain notoriety was during the rise of communist revolt groups in Russia, as they would often need to rely on less than legal means to secure funding or supplies for planned campaigns against the Tsarist forces. There was even a bank robbery that was planned by Lenin and Stalin in 1907, which they often denied because it was not a popular decision by the rest of the wider socialist movement. Still, much of this was essentially opportunistic, moreso than the organized network we understand today.
Where we first saw organized Russian crime actually arose during the era of Stalin's reign, especially within the gulags. This is also the first time that there was something that could be called the Воровской мир, meaning the Theives' World, or the Воровской закон, meaning the Theives' Code. This is also where we see many of the customs and traditions of Russian criminal life begin to appear, some of which would survive to present day. It was in the Gulags where the visual language of tattoos were made, usually to denote what you were in for, what crimes you had committed, or what services you could provide.
What defined the воровской мир, for the most part, was the desire to leave the mainstream. To be a вор, or thief, was to denounce what "normal" Russian's were supposed to believe in, and to adopt the new rules and principles of the вори в законе, or thieves in code. While there was never a rulebook one could read, the code was often kept by senior prison members, who would enforce and arbitrate it to others. Above many other rules, there was usually one supreme law of the thief: "Never work with the state." Anyone found doing so would be lucky to come away with their lives.
Yet, much of this began to change when Stalin died, and many of the original prisoners would begin to be released.
## Part 2 - Emergence
In part 2, much of the book's focus is on the years between Stalin's death and when Putin came into power. In the years immediately following Stalin's death, there was a massive release of prisoners back into the Russian citizenry. In the late 1950s and the 60s, this led to a massive upheaval for most of the local communities, many of which were not prepared for the wave of thieves. Generally, this led to the first major clashes between the Soviet government and the growing underworld of criminals, as some of the more violent elements of the вори sought to fight directly against the government. Yet, most of the newly freed вори tried to establish more robust networks, utilizing the connections they had made in the gulags to find new opportunities. And, the biggest opportunities were in the black markets that had arisen within Stalin's reign, which the Soviet police were more than willing to turn a blind eye to. What started from this was a precarious symbiotic relationship, where connected criminals began to establish networks for smuggling, bootlegging, and moonshining, and the authorities would let them be, if they didn't step on their toes. Sometimes it was state actors that would use the services of these criminals, much like during Prohibition in the US. Essentially, the beginning of the relationship between the Russian state and the Russian underworld started to form.
Yet, it was some of the reforms made by Brezhnev and Gorbachev that solidified many of these relationships, and even made the public far more receptive to the criminals overall. The most substantial of these were the reforms that attempted to curtail the problem of alcoholism, including limiting when alcohol could be sold, who could sell alcohol, and who could produce alcohol. Unfortunately, much like Prohibition in the US, this meant that the average person would often turn to pre-existing criminal groups to supply their alcohol. The most interesting effect of this was that much of the public began to view members of the criminal underworld as if they were respected members of the community. It wouldn't be surprising for a normal citizen to buy alcohol from a gang member, and simultaneously ask them where they could get their shoes fixed, or to ask for advice about raising children. While there's something comedic about the image, it was actually quite a big shift in how relaxed the average citizen became regarding the presence of criminals in their community. Since then, the presence of gangs or criminal networks has almost become an accepted fact for most citizens. So, whenever a movement tends to start against organized crime, it's become increasingly difficult to mobilize people for the cause, leading to the problem becoming more endemic.
Yet, the final nail in the coffin was the increased interpenetration between the criminal networks and legitimate businesses. While the groundwork for this was laid down during the waning years of the Soviet Union, it was the rapid shift towards capital markets under Yeltsin that allowed for a now vast criminal network to expand rapidly, and often quite violently. In the first place, the relaxing or dissolution of many soviet economic principles often meant that there wasn't a robust regulatory system in place to deal with overly-aggressive market strategies, or sudden conglomeration and rapid integration. This was true for both legitimate and illegitimate business, which often meant that the most aggressive players were the ones that won out during the 1990s. And often, legitimate and illegitimate business would mix, making it difficult to tell which was which. For example, criminals would often start a legitimate business, such as a private security firm, which would often front for illegitimate business, such as protection racketeering. The rapid integration between these two sides of the economy meant that, by the time the new millennium came about, any effort to pull out the criminals meant that you'd likely be pulling apart several legitimate businesses, harming a significant portion of innocent citizens that didn't know they were working for a criminal network. The roots of the problem became even more difficult to grab a hold of.
## Part 3 - Varieties
Part 3 of the book explains how much of this began to manifest within the 2000s, and the different types of criminal organizations that are present today in Russia. To begin with, there was the shift in policy taken by Putin when he took power in 1999. Outwardly, Putin made a big deal of fighting against crime, and there were legitimate efforts to root out the more violent groups. Yet, a secondary policy began to take shape, where a blind eye was turned to other criminal groups, as long as they didn't interfere with the business of the state. For the most part, this helped to create many of the policies that are still in use today for criminal organizations. While it was common to have an opponent killed by drive-by or car bomb in the 90s, the crackdown on overt violence meant that most methods to remove opponents became more economic in nature, usually by bullying out your competitor, though assassinations still occur frequently enough. Though, these are now usually more precise and less dangerous for the average citizen.
For the most part though, the majority of criminal activity in Russia now mirrors much of the legitimate business world, where disputes are handled by arbitration or contract making, and different groups usually seek to find a workable solution. One of two big of this are the Eastern Association of Thieves, which acted like a trade guild for various gangs along the Eastern coast of Russia, though their position is now a bit precarious with the growth of Chinese criminal groups in the region. The other is the massive heroin routes that connect the Afghan opium production market to Europe. Roughly 30% of the world's heroin trade travels from Afghanistan through Russia, where it eventually goes West to Europe and East to China. The route is essentially comprised of various smaller groups who make agreements on what they are allowed to take for themselves and what they are required to pass along, much like a semi-connected distribution chain in legitimate production. While there are big players in the Russian criminal underworld, they are now more akin to CEOs than the old image of mob bosses. It also doesn't help that many of the larger players, now known as the авторитеты, or authorities, were usually big players within legitimate business, often crossing paths with state actors. Sometimes, it's too difficult to tell who's an honest businessman, and who's moonlighting as one.
## Part 4 - Future
Part 4 examines how, over time, the concept of the воровской мир changed, and how those changes now represent much of the difficulty in categorizing crime and criminal networks in Russia. Originally, the old gulag code of refusing to work with the state guided much decisions made by early вори. Yet, over the next few decades, the integration between state actors and criminal elements started to break down, with the modern day having the авторитеты, who often operate in both circles. Now, does this mean that crime runs Russia? Not to the extent that is commonly believed. The relationship appears to be more of an uneasy symbiosis. The state ignores crime, if it doesn't interfere with the Kremlin, and may even be rewarded if it helps the state. Yet, if a particular group tries to get too large, or violence starts to increase, then the state will often come in like a hammer, even if just to preserve its image.
On the other hand though, there often appear to be coincidental deals made between the Kremlin and criminals that at least make other countries nervous. For example, the annexation of Crimea appeared to coincidentally coincide with a temporary easing of tensions among criminal groups in Odessa, who ended up gaining territory from rivals that tended to operate more inland in Ukraine. Or how many cyberattacks beneficial for the Kremlin appear to come from hacker groups that suddenly have more capabilities than they showed previously. While there is nothing definitive to point to, there is enough to believe that the Kremlin will not shy away from utilizing criminal networks for their own benefit.
For the most part, the question of Russian crime is one that doesn't have a definitive answer, and the effects that it has on other nations within Eastern Europe are proving to be difficult for those nations to deal with. Yet, there are those who attempt to do what they can, and do have hope for the future. While there may not be any clear answers, or a way forward, there is still hope that these problems can be dealt with. Maybe not tomorrow, but someday, hopefully soon.
# Russian Mafia in Media
## Black Lagoon
But, let's get to something a bit more fun before I give my personal thoughts, which is how well does Hotel Moscow stack up to the actual Russian Mafia? Well, as I said before, it's confusingly accurate. For one, let's start with the whole "disgraced battalion" aspect. Certainly, there were афганцы, meaning russian soldiers from afghanistan, who came back from the war and felt betrayed by their country. Many veterans actually had a hard time getting the benefits they were promised, including severance pay or health services, and this would turn a decent number of these veterans to crime. They were especially prominent in the lower levels of crime, providing protection and intimidation services. Very few would usually make it big, however, and the ones that did would often act as contractors for other gangs. Having a whole battalion become an organized gang was essentially unheard of, but it wasn't impossible.
In addition to that, Black Lagoon is set at some point in the 90s. Besides one date given specifically, it's a bit unclear how the events line up with one another. Regardless, was there a massive outpouring of Russian crime to the world? Did the Russian mafia establish themselves globally? Well, plenty of people thought so. Members of the US congress certainly talked about the fear of a global Russian mafia infiltrating the US. As it is though, this didn't really happen in the way that people think. For the most part, Russian criminals that operate outside of Russia aren't really connected to the criminal networks within Russia. They essentially operate on their own. Now, this was new, as before the 90s, it was near impossible for a mafia to come into the territory of another without being wiped out. What the Russians did differently is that they didn't take territory. Instead, they acted as contractors and business partners, usually for services that the local gangs couldn't do themselves. In Europe, this usually meant offering smuggling and money laundering. In South America, it was access to heroin trade routes in exchange for cocaine. It's a bit unclear if they've established footholds in Africa, China, or Southeast Asia. The furthest it appears they've gone in Asia is Afghanistan. So, would there be a group operating out of Thailand? Possibly, but there really is nothing to believe it to be true.
So what does Hotel Moscow do in the show? Are they territory grabbers, taking as much property as they can? Well, no. Most of the crime groups in Roanapur seem to have an uneasy agreement to leave territory alone. Instead, it seems that Hotel Moscow just operate sections of drug trade, hiring the Lagoon company for smuggling jobs, and possibly protection and intimidation services, like they did with the Yakuza. Although, that was certainly more over the top than most Russian criminals would operate these days, especially outside of Russia. All in all, there is a decent amount of line-up between what Hotel Moscow is in Black Lagoon and how the Russian mafia operated in foreign countries during the 1990s. Clearly, it's exaggerated, almost like a mythological version of the Russian mafia, but there is some parallels. Again, it's confusingly accurate for what most think is basically a "turn your brain off" action show. At the very least, it does suggest that Hiroe, the author, did some research into the real life Russian criminal underground. Honestly, props to him.

As for other, usually more grounded depictions of Russian criminal life, there are a decent handful of Russian movies that portray the mafia. Just as Americans are fascinated by figures like Al Capone, the Russians love making movies and singing songs about their criminals. The most famous example, and one that's still immensely popular is Брат, meaning Brother, made in 1997. It's a far more bleak and honest take of the wild days of the 90s, and I'd highly recommend it to anyone. Not so much брат 2, but it's not the worst. I'd also recommend the movie Антикиллер, made in 2002. It's a more action oriented, low budget crime movie about a vigilante fighting the mob, but it got some decent praise for depicting criminal hierarchies quite well. Finally, I'd also suggest Левиафан, or Leviathan, made in 2014. While it isn't a mafia movie, its focus was more on the creeping corruption into politics that drove a rather bleak outlook for the average Russian.
# Personal Takeaway
So, what did I get out of this book, and why do I think it helps with my other studies? Well, if you'll forgive me, a bit of backstory might help. I grew up in a military family, with a Grandfather that served in Vietnam and a Father who served in the Gulf War. The school I went to was actually built during the height of nuclear panic, complete with a fallout shelter, which had a gym, some classrooms, and a massive storage unit. I remember my mother telling me about the drills they used to go through, and whenever Russia came up in the news, my father would say that they were just waiting to strike. Then, the september 11 attacks happened when I was 8. I'd hear parents argue about whether Al-queda was our fault for arming the Mujahadeen against the Soviets. I may have been born in 93', when the Cold War technically over, but almost everything in global politics kept going back to how it all began in the Cold War. Somewhere in my teenage years, I started to think that if Russia was such a threat, then I should learn Russian, so I could understand them. Though, more than a decade later, and I can still barely read a news article, so still working on that.
Still, I've always had a general interest in Russia and the history of the Cold War. While I've learned about some conflicts, such as the Angolan Civil War or the revolution in Burkina Faso, there's so much more I need to learn. And I've certainly gained a new perspective on Russia overall. In many ways, I'm now more sympathetic to the average citizen in Russia. For the most part, they've basically been swept aside within Russian history. The tsars didn't care, Stalin didn't care, Gorbachev and Yeltsin tried, but unfortunately often made the problem worse. The more I learn about Russia, the more I can see that having someone like Putin in charge was never an inevitability. And while having a vast criminal network operate in your country isn't ideal, it makes sense why it exists in the first place. Overall, I'm more sad for Russia than anything. There were potential points where it could have been different, but it just seems to get the worst luck everytime.
I think much of the coming century will see a better Russia overall, but there does have to be a concerted effort to make that happen. For now, there should be considerable effort into stopping their territorial ambitions. I suppose we'll have to see what we can do past that.