# Main Points
- John Holt was, in essence, the progenitor of the modern unschooling movement. Part of what I hope to capture with this project is a way of explaining just how insane both the project was, as well as the other aspects of John Holt that have essentially been memory holed by advocates for the movement.
- It should be said that the particular branch that most aligns with John Holt are often within a particular Libertarian Branch of politics overall, which makes further sense when we actually look over what Holt wrote. It's also notable that a number of people who look to Holt for guidance also look towards Ayn Rand as a notable figure of unschooling, which should help us understand that particularities of this particular branch.
- In saying this, it is also understood that there are multiple branches of unschooling. Believe it or not, there are both right wing and left wing variants of unschooling as a whole, and it's incredibly difficult to track down many of the differences between them wholesale. The best one can really say is that both tend towards particular forms of anarchism, with the right-leaning factor more towards some aspects of anarcho-capitalism, and the left-leaning factor towards more factors of anarcho-communism. This is not true of all member of unschooling, but it is a good starting point for how varied this field can be.
- John Holt may have coined the term "unschooling", but he has been far more popular among those who lean rightward than leftward, so it should be understood that we are talking about a group of people that are both broadly anti-institutional and anti-communist. The majority reason for many of these people to fall into this viewpoint is the belief that educational institutions have taken on a communist or "social justice" or "woke" agenda. There is significant overlap between those who follow John Holt and those who believe that secondary or high schools are "transing our kids" or filled with LGBT propaganda. I'm not saying this to disparage the group in particular. One can hold either belief, but not be part of the other group. Yet, this is still a significant crossover that should be understood.
- As it is, there are four major periods of John Holt's life that should be understood. The first is the pre-educational life, in which Holt served as a member of the US Navy. There is very little information about this era that doesn't come from Holt himself, so we have to trust what he says here. In that period, he learned how dangerous nuclear weapons are, and decided to join the United World Federalists, which is an advocacy group for a global world government based around avoiding war and nuclear armament. Yes, this happened. 