# Important People Mentioned:
- [[Vladimir Putin]]
# External Material:
Lecture by Galeotti at NYU about the book: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J77TmCqOnS8

Lecture by Galeotti at The Valdas Adamkus Presidential Library-Museum: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z2h-aKqoZME
# Notes:

## Part 1 - Foundations:
### Chapter 1 & 2:
- Tsarist Era Criminal elements came from different sources: Rural and City
	- Rural crime was a version of community justice to combat mostly thievery. Given the overall lack of policing, and the rampant bands of horse thieves, communities would usually form their own enforcement groups, which would engage in their own legal process, usually resulting in lynch mobs. Though, there were successful groups of thieves and bandits that typically formed around the Volga River, which created an intricate network of those who would bring stolen goods to port, and ship them elsewhere for fencing.
	- City crime is more of the introduction to Воровской Мир(*Vorovskoi mir*, or Thieve's World). Rapid Industrialization, poor living conditions, and political unrest led to groups of people seeking to mark themselves as opposed to the mainstream culture. In addition, the police were often undermanned, poorly trained(if at all), and often corrupt themselves due to lack of proper oversight. While banditry was still the main criminal activity, the targets(warehouses, nobles, ships) and tactics(pickpocketing, information brokering, racketeering) were more complex. Some even became celebrities.

### Chapter 3:
- Robberies and gang activity found new allies among revolutionary forces between the revolutions of 1905 and 1917, with Stalin and Lenin using them to access funds for their causes. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^KamoQuote]]
- The Russian Civil War(1918-22), turned the Bolshevik movement into one that focused on survival, which led to criminals previously prosecuted under the Tsar being accepted into the ranks of the political and police forces. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^LeninCriminal]]
- Economic troubles during and immediately after the Civil War appeared to be the first major shift in criminal behavior among the populace. Homelessness and drug use rose significantly, and early policies focused on establishing the new Bolshevik state made progress difficult. Homeless youth especially became a problem. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^YouthViolence]]
- The use of gulags for criminals, including petty and political, created a new environment for criminal elements to better organize, and helped to make the Воровской Мир more stable and powerful over time, with more top-down organization. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^GulagVorovskoiMir]]

### Chapter 4:
- It appears that much of the later mafia activity found it's foundations within the gulag system, mostly as a reaction towards survival within the strict labour camps.
- One of the more strict laws set by members of the Воровской мир was a complete cut off from cooperating with state actors, including camp guards and elevated prisoners. Though, this led to a divide within the gulags, as more opportunities were present for those that assisted the camp guards with their duties. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^chestnyagy]]
- World War 2 led to many gulag prisoners becoming forcibly recruited into the Red Army for defense, which led to further encroachments into the principles of the Воровской мир. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^order227]]
- Upon return, a sizable portion of soldiers that were prisoners of war would be redirected to the gulags, as punishment for either desertion or betrayal. Further reading([Soviet Repressions against former prisoners of war](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_repressions_against_former_prisoners_of_war)) also suggests that many of these prisoners were not given veteran status, and were typically looked down upon. It is still a matter of debate how many were legitimate defectors, or how many were unfairly punished. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^pows]]
- The influx of former soldiers and various ethnic groups into the gulags changed some of the power balance and hierarchies within the camps, as new groups would form that did not strictly adhere to the rudimentary rule system of the вори.
- This led to what is assumed a government supported move against the блатне, or the Traditionalist thieves, and the суки, the 'bitches' or state collaborators. In the span of several years after the war, violence escalated between the groups, with the Traditionalists quickly losing numbers, which was beneficially for the authorities, as they were the anti-state group. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^bitcheswar]]
- In the end, the decade after Stalin's death led to rapid depopulation within the gulags, with many of the first released to be the суки, who still considered themselves to be part of the воровской мир, but also believed in working with the state when it was to their advantage. [[The Vory by Mark Galeotti#^newvory]]

### Chapter 5:
- Rituals were a regular part of initiation into gangs throughout most of the history of Russian crime groups, though the severity of the rituals, and what they signified, changed over time. It's generally believed that much of the change was in the restructuring of the Вори during the 1960s, when they began to move out of the gulag system.
- The notable change that was made with from the move to pre-camp towards camp life, was the formation of a unified code of the Вори, in which there was no proper structure, but an understanding of the "accepted" way of being a respected criminal. This led to various rituals, usually unique to individual camps, which had their own languages of tattoos, slang, and fashion.
- This also extended to rituals and regulations for those who were "accepted" вори within the camps, and how selection for elevated thieves would be initiated and utilized.
- A particular hint towards these is the development of language that came from the gulags, much of which being the appropriation of common words to denote, in slang, more dark and criminal meanings. For example, if a prisoner wanted to escape from a camp in Siberia, they would, often enough, convince another prisoner to join them in their escape, so that they could later kill and eat them to survive the harsh conditions. The word Мясо(*myaso*), meaning meat, started to be used to describe the victims of these schemes.
- While this is typical for any sort of profession(medical terminology/slang, legal terminology/slang, etc.), there was a dual purpose to this changing of language overall: to communicate in such a way as to encode meaning in everyday language, which kept outsiders unaware of the true meaning, and to initiate hopefuls into the criminal underworld, as learning the language was a rite of passage in its own way.
- While criminal slang existed before the introduction of vast prisoner camps, it was often regional or based around a single grouping of criminals. With many criminal elements being suddenly thrust together during the time of gulags, homogenization of criminal language led to new outlooks and utilizations of a more universal system of communicating. Though, much of this began to change in the 1960s, as the gulags were slowly removed, and criminals looked for other avenues to pursue.
- The visual language of tattoos was equally homogenized, especially to denote specific meaning towards other prisoners within the gulag system. It could either be used to denote specific marks of criminal life(prison terms, crimes, etc.), to communicate(signifying occupation or intent), or to punish others(marking an outsider or denoting a slight against the Вори). Though, it's difficult to create a full lexicon, as often the only people who knew the meanings themselves were part of the thieves' world, and they would often refuse to explain to outsiders.
- Various other artifacts were used to denote the separation of the thieves' world from mainstream society. First, there was the naming that would be given newer initiates, that served both to give them a new identity, and to utilize proper codenames for communication. There was also the obsession of games of chance, and the strict adherence to bets made by participants, even up to 3 years of silence. Clothes and accessories would often be used to denote rank between members. Finally, music served as both a metaphor for criminal life, and a way to communicate values and ideas throughout the diaspora.
- The last portion of this to be understood was the role that women would often take within the wider Воровской мир. Given the valuation towards a form of hyper-masculinity, women were often regulated to tools and orifices for male вори. Wives especially were treated as property of the gang, instead of a partner for an individual. Rapes and murders of both wives and female prisoners was not only common, but expected. Some women created gangs of their own, but their small numbers and expected status made them almost ineffectual.

## Part 2 - Emergence:
### Chapter 6:
- The death of Stalin left the Soviet Union in a precarious state, as many of the policies of Stalin brought benefits to some, but devastation to many. The resulting power vacuum left both statesmen and citizens in a bind of figuring out what the new direction of the Soviet Union would become, and often whether to acknowledge or condemn the previous few decades.
- The вори и суки, which had faced off as foes within the gulag system, continued their conflict during the years after the disassembly of the gulags that occurred in the Soviet Union during the 50s and 60s. While originally the вори were originally losing, the changing landscape of Russian political and economic life led to new methods and tactics in the ongoing conflict between criminals and the state.
- Now outside of the gulags, the primary competitor for criminals was the Soviet state, which had military and police power to fight against the incoming wave of released вори. Soon, most of the adherents of the 'thieves code' were run underground, with little to no network like they had within the prison camps. For all intents and purposes, it was believed that the growth of the 'thieves world' was stymied, and that criminal activity was removed from normal society.
- This resulted in the growth of more independent groups, many of which did not adhere to the principles laid down by the older generation of вори. Yet, new economic factors, such as the growth of corrupt statesmen and the black market, gave many of these new groups footholds to operate from. A new relationship began to form, where the Soviet government began to turn a blind eye to the black market as a secondary economic force, as long as it did not disrupt the Soviets overall.
- Much of the corruption started from the Stalin era, but continued well into the 1980s. Often, to fulfill demanding quotas of the Five-Year Plan, politicians and statesmen would accept and deliver bribes and underhanded deals. Over time, many of these turned into de facto principles of statesmen, where the handing over of deals or goods was expected by those in power.
- The battle between enterprising individuals and state ideology often became a game of shadows, where statesmen would often endorse illegal enterprises off-hand, but act within their official capacity on the other hand. While many of the deceptions of these statesmen would utilize state capacities, there was always the threat of being exposed. More underground elements were needed to hide operations.
- To secure goods and production, statesmen would often turn to smugglers and black-market entrepreneurs. This began a more symbiotic relationship between the new wave of criminals and the statesmen that were looking for new markets and avenues of production and distribution. Yet, this also prompted changes within the criminals, who began to learn how to better manipulate and utilize the state apparatuses for their own benefit.

### Chapter 7:
- Many of the reforms of Gorbachev inadvertently gave the criminal elements of Russia more power. Certainly, they were reforms that should, in theory, work for any country that is attempting to move towards a more free economy. Unfortunately, there was already an underbelly of corruption, black markets, and extortion that were too well equipped to pounce on the reforms than a proper system to fight back against them.
- The first major reform that backfired was the focus on reducing alcoholic consumption, which had much the same effect as Prohibition in the United States. Part of this was that the вори, who already had illegal networks of production and distribution in place, suddenly had much more demand for their services. This produced a reciprocal relationship between the Russian citizen, who had been used to drinking, and the only people who could supply a now more controlled substance.
- There was also Gorbachev's attempt to open the market a bit by allowing private business Co-ops, which were typically abused by early adopters to make a quick buck. Criminals also seized the opportunity, often starting racketeering rings around the new businesses, and offering various services that couldn't be found elsewhere, such as smuggling supplies or ruining competition. Over time, this gave criminals more access to legitimate markets, which led to further entrenchment in Russian economic and political life.
- In addition, the era brought about newcomers to the criminal scene. Sportsmen, mainly those in gymnastics or martial arts, saw new opportunities arise when funding for sports programs started to decrease. They would often be involved in protection rackets and act as muscle. Similarly, the афганцы(*afgantsy*) came back from war and were largely dropped to the side by the Russian government, due to various reasons. Some took up advocacy or starting their own gyms, while others found new opportunities among the growing criminal elements.
- In summation, the growth of criminal elements within Russia accelerated within the 1970s and 1980s, mostly due to the confluence of several factors. First, the curbing of alcohol, a staple in Russian daily life, led to the introduction of the average person to criminals, many of which formed rather beneficial relationships. The opening up of private business allowed criminal elements new avenues of bolstering their entrenchment in Russian society. The introduction of newcomers to the criminal world, especially skilled individuals with martial or war experience, bolstered the numbers and capabilities of growing criminal enterprises.

### Chapter 8:
- Through the 1990s, as the Russian government attempted to transition to a liberal economic state, criminal elements were suddenly on a much more even playing field. The dissolution and privatization of many state assets allowed for gangs to acquire legitimate trade deals, which would often front their criminal goals. Also, the sudden shift in funding, especially the lack of funding, for many legal structures, including the police and the courts, incentivized citizens to turn to criminal organizations, who had the capability to enforce their own sense of law.
- There was also the new cutthroat style of capitalism that emerged during the 90s, as a sudden loosening of the regulations led many to treat markets as a means to an end, with increasing capital and resources as their main objective.
- Many of the first sectors to turn to organized crime were in the business sector, who needed protection and dispute handling from a structure that could follow through with both enforcement and swift judgement. With the courts defanged, gangs became the primary provider of these services.
- There also grew the concept of the "honest gangster". While the image came from previous generations of вори, the security offered by the gang's code meant some sense of stability during the rocky economic reality of Russia. Gangs were still highly violent and ruthless, but they made a point of honesty with their intentions and emphasized staying true to one's word, either positively or negatively.
- While there were some who did not operate under the premise of an "honest gangster", the organizations that grew tremendously in size, scope, and capabilities were often those who adopted general business practices. In some way, criminals adopted less militaristic standpoints and strategies, and turned to a more corporate and businesslike structure, complete with contracting and financial accounting.
- When power transferred to Putin in 1999, new policies further entrenched these elements into the state apparatus. On it's face, Putin's policy was a crackdown on criminal elements and corrupt officials. Behind the scenes, however, more leeway was given to those organizations that cooperated with state elements. The general principle of Putin's early tenure was that the state was in power, and all other elements would pay primacy to the state rather than their own interests. While there was some friction, this proved to be beneficial to the changing criminal underworld, as they were generally left alone if they managed to cut the state a portion of their profits.
- In turn, this gave rise to the авторитет(*avtoritet* or authority) class of criminals, who essentially operated as criminal businessmen. They would have legal businesses and economic interests, while skimming funds off for more illegitimate enterprises, such as smuggling, counterfeiting, or extortion. By the 2000s, the normal operations of the criminal underworld became the new form of Russian oligarchic criminal.

## Part 3 - Varieties:
### Chapter 9:
- The majority of Russian criminal networks are not strictly hierarchical structures in the same way that the Italian mafia or Japanese yakuza would be. It's more a loose network, with some smaller groups forming surrounding various common interests, territories. Some have clear leaders, while others do not. In a way, much of it is closer to a business structure, where higher ups constitute power, but more in the capacity of managerial style than traditional hierarchical structures.
- One of the effects of this is that there isn't a strict territory, such a neighborhood or street, that one could point towards in order to define what counts as being part of the Russian mob. Rather, you'd have to point to the social and financial networks, which are much more fluid and difficult to track and contain.
- Galeotti references [Page 24 of this UN study](https://www.unodc.org/pdf/crime/publications/Pilot_survey.pdf) to denote how organized crime groups are classified by structures. The rest of this chapter will be examples of each of these structure types appear within Russian criminal groups.
- Often, the most strict hierarchical gangs can be found within very small units, typically serving one specific function within the wider criminal network. The largest one to keep such a structure were the Uralmash, which started as a regionally based criminal-group that grew in power and influence during the 90s. Yet, Putin's campaign to remove obvious criminal activity forced them to shift to a more subtle form of hierarchy. The group now operates more like a business club, where owners of variously connected interests will coordinate with each other on policy.
- In the Eastern portions of Russia, more regionally-based groups formed. Historically, the region, as it was so far away from the ruling cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg, were far more anarchistic in their structure, with most gangs keeping small pockets of territory, and were usually tied into the power structures of their area. Over time, with the rise of criminal activity overall, the Far Eastern Association of Thieves emerged, which acted like a trade association for the disconnected gangs. They were also able to establish connections with criminal networks that were emerging from China, which gave them a foothold against the interests of Western groups. Yet, Chinese influence grew, and most of European Russia started to recede interest from the region, leading to the overall loss of the Association. These days, the region is Russian in name and association, but most of the activity in the region is now under control of Chinese criminal networks.
- Clustered hierarchies, what the study calls a Hierarchical Conglomerate, are mostly found within the various groups that are attempting to achieve a specific goal. For example, roughly 30 percent of world heroin trafficking flow goes through Russia from Afghanistan, which then funnels it both East towards Chinese markets and West towards European markets. These routes are a smattering of various regional or territorial groups that have created a robust network of de-facto trade routes. Russian groups, among the largest within the network, often attempt to expand their influence, usually through lateral integration of more production, though stability to the overall network tends to limit how violent these attempts are. The majority of local heroin distribution, for example, is quite tame, as it's a collection of smaller gangs that are essentially paid in their share of drugs to distribute. Thus, economic competition is favored over aggressive territorial grabs.
- In many ways, this demonstrates the sort of 'corporatizing' of drug markets that began in the late 1980s. In this case, there are several branches of drug production, such as opium farming/harvesting, opium shipping, heroin production, then shipping, and finally distribution. Different portions of the chain are handled by connected but separate groups, which mirrors the corporate structure of subletting factories and hiring management staff for each. The heroin acts as both product and stock in the overall trade, with many of the routes substantiated over long-term relationships that are formed among many of the different groups. Reputation plays primacy here, as one needs to be able to back up their portion of the chain. Any disruption, such as seizure by the police, harms those further down the chain, and considerable work is needed to repair the relationship.
- Core group hierarchies are somewhat rare in Russia today, but the Tambovskaya(Tambov) group in St. Petersburg was the largest and most notable. Starting in the late 1980s, it rapidly grew until 1993, where it was restructured to fit a more business oriented world. It sought out contracts with businesses, both to give the group footholds within the legitimate market, but also to serve as fronts. This could include security companies, energy production, and transportation. Many of these moves also placed higher group members into the circles of politicians and large business owners, giving them further access to resources and connections.
- The shift to more aggressive crackdowns on criminal activity, as well as the reputation for St. Petersburg to be secretly run by the Tambov group, led to another restructuring. The core group started to separate out various sectors to their own operations, with the core group acting more like a board of directors, typically from outside the country. For the most part, it is a loose connection of operations that follows directives. As this is all fairly recent, it's somewhat of a question in how this will fare in the future.
- Finally, there is the criminal network, of which the most successful have been within and surrounding Moscow. While this started much like the Tambov group in St. Petersburg, it quickly became more of a criminal network of loosely associated groups that wished to operate in the area. Notably, any attempt to gain control over the group is often met with severe resistance. In a way, the structure is more akin to a smattering of local businesses, all of which have their particular clientele and markets that they compete in. The largest contributor to the system staying in place are the introduction of arbitration groups, which helped to settle disputes between groups on the basis of their reputation. These groups, such as Solntsevo, provided services for criminal enterprises, but also legitimate businesses during times when the court became backed-up and difficult to rely on. As such, much of the power structure within these networks is denoted by who could be trusted to properly arbitrate for others.

### Chapter 10:
- The first part of this chapter is focused on the story of a man who the author is calling Borz, who was a Chechen contract killer who operated in Moscow. While there are pieces of historical data, it is mostly focused Borz' experience, especially within the criminal world.
- Chechens hold a special place within the criminal underworld of Russia, as they carry a particular reputation, and are often fiercely loyal to one another. In some sense, they are essentially their own franchise of criminals, more centered around a particular subculture than a strict code or organization.
- One of the artifacts that came from Chechen national identity is the concept of the *abreg*, which was akin to the Western sense of Robin Hood, who engaged in banditry for chivalrous or moral reasons. Given the repeated history of Chechen resistance to Russian control, the identity became somewhat tied with the concept of the freedom fighter, which also informed Chechen criminals.
- Russia would often claim during its conflicts in Chechnya that it was fighting a 'gangster regime'. This was, in some sense, true, as various local gangs had established themselves in power structures within the region. Yet, there was also a wide Chechen diaspora that were disconnected from those groups. It was cheekily called the "two Chechnyas". One which was based within the Chechen region, and one that operated outside.
- In the groups that operate in Russia, there is no overarching structure of Chechen gangs. Rather, there is what is known as the *bratva*, which is more a cultural connection between Chechen gangs, which appeals towards shared heritage and the moral authority of *abreg*.
- While Chechens enjoyed some early success in Moscow, the rise of Slavic gangs began to push out the Chechens from the region. In addition, the Russian invasion of Chechnya led much of the police force to view Chechen criminals as potential sources of political unrest, which they mostly left alone until they felt safe enough to stop a potential insurgency.
- Much of the Chechen criminal network has become a niche market, but one that holds a certain mythology to it. They are generally considered to be the most honorable, but most ruthless groups of criminals. As such, they are often considered 'the protection racketeers protection racketeer'. To even be associated with a Chechen group is often enough to bolster the idea of a gang's capability to follow through on any promises made.
- One of the results of the Second Chechen War was the installation of Ramzan Kadyrov as the head of the Chechen state. In many cases, this has created a brutal regime, which regularly disposes of political enemies, and embezzles funding for personal gain. While none of it is ideal, another war would be devastating.
- In a way, Galeotti states, there are still two Chechnyas: The state of Chechnya, which runs its own form of a criminal empire, blessed by the Russian government, and the Chechen diaspora, who have created their own sense of identity within Russia, often leaking over into criminal life.

### Chapter 11:
- Georgians make up a fairly large proportion of the Russian criminal network, with some estimates putting them up to half of the controlling leaders within the country. While Russians will attribute this to overwhelming violence, it appears it is more an effect of the Georgians focus on deal-making and being business minded.
- Very early on in the career of Georgian criminals, they sought to entangle themselves within the political sphere of Georgian life. Dzhaba Ioseliani was especially well known for establishing ties with various politicians, including several presidents, and establishing militia organizations. When the Georgian state attempted to crackdown on these elements, many decided to flee to Russia.
- One of the more notorious groups of Georgians is headed by Tariel Oniani, who proved to be a cunning and ruthless provocateur within the relatively stable Russian criminal underworld. He would push for more aggression, and would often instigate other groups, then ignore any possible arbitration. In 2010, he was arrested and sentenced to jail. Still, he receives visitors and contacts people through video chat, meaning he still operates today, though usually at a distance, through his fiercely loyal inner circle.
- In contrast to this Aslan Usoyan, also known as Grandfather Hassan. His main strengths were in management of coffers, brokering deals between various ethnic groups, and learning to restructure as needed. For example, he had been given control of a common *obshchak*(общак), which were the pooled funds of several groups for business and emergency needs. A rival, 'Rudik', accused Usoyan of embezzling and mismanaging funds in 1998, during the financial crisis where the ruble was devalued. Disgraced, Usoyan managed to crawl back into prominence by becoming an arbitrator between the Russians, Georgians, Armenians, and so on. Eventually, he was assassinated in 2013, which left his holdings to several family members that he had been training.
- There was also the rise of Rovshan Dzhaniyev, an Azeri(a person from Azerbaijan) who got his start in Abkhazia, a smaller region in Georgia. Dzhaniyev's appeal, especially to the younger generation, was his stereotypical approach to gang life, in which violence was the preferred negotiating method. While unsuitable to the current regime of Russian criminal life, it found favor among those who felt like the business aesthetic of Russian crime was not what they preferred. He was eventually killed in Turkey in 2016.

### Chapter 12:
- International Russian crime is an increasingly difficult phenomenon to properly categorize or understand. While most primarily think of these organizations as either ethnically Russian or just Russian-speaking, the truth is that the adoption of many into the structure of organized crime generally reaches beyond ethnic, linguistic, or cultural lines. Most often, the Russians act as business partners, typically as facilitators for supplies or connections that benefits the other party, for a hefty fee. It's not the makeup of the group that Russians have exported to the wider criminal world, but rather a unique structure and ethic to criminal life.
- Within many of the post-Soviet states, there are typically two kinds of local criminal scenes: those with a robust criminal underground, often connected to the local power structure, and those that are more fractured, often in nations with little national power of their own. Russians crime networks have learned to deal with both, usually to provide access to supplies that may be needed by local gangs. While Russian gangs do have the power to muscle into some of the territory, most have found it to be far more beneficial to act as business partners, often giving local groups access to the transnational markets, such as routes into the international heroin trade.
- Though, there was also an initial wave of Russian crime networks worming their way into more volatile territories, such as the Baltics. With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that this was more to give Russian criminals a potential escape route during the relative uncertainty of the late 1990s. Over time, however, most Russian criminals did not seek to maintain these footholds for long, and concerted effort by local communities, often seeing the Russian criminals as a potential precursor to invasion, began to push the Russians out.
- Initial footholds in the US, usually 'Little Odessa', faced similar problems. They established quickly, mostly stuck to securing a network in the new local environment, and were quickly ousted by local enforcement due to fears of a global Russian Mafia.
- As time went on, tactics shifted towards the previously mentioned model. Russians, instead of securing gang-havens of their own, would instead seek to fill gaps in the local market. Illicit services, such as access to wide money-laundering networks, bootleg goods, fraud networks, and so on, were the mainstays of the second wave of Russian outgrowth. In this capacity, the new global Russian criminal networks, much like they did in post-Soviet states, sought to create beneficial relationships with local gangs, supplanting themselves as useful business partners more than their own group or identity.
- Overall, the global trends of Russian groups going transnational appear to align with similar groups attempting to similarly turn towards global markets. What makes the Russians unique is the particular strategies that they have implemented to achieve this end, and how successful they have been in establishing networks in areas that other groups may struggle with. Though, this requires understanding that what we typically call the "Russian mafia" is still largely within Russia itself, with some footholds in the wider Eurasian territory. Most of the transnational connections do not have the ethnic, linguistic, or cultural makings of a "Russian mafia", but more exist as external networks created to further increase profits in a new global economy.

## Part 4 - Future:
### Chapter 13:
- Now examining the policies of the Putin era of Russia, we can start to see the modern understanding of crime in Russia. Specifically, Putin makes a big show of rooting out corruption, or of eliminating crime, but this does not reflect in reality.
- Much of the model of crime, as noted previously, has begun to accept a more homogenized form of enterprising business, in which criminal networks provide services that are either illegal(bootlegging, smuggling, etc.) or semi-legal(protection, arbitration, etc.).
- Most of the relationship between the state and crime is now that of a symbiotic relationship. One doesn't control the other, but has rather figured out how to co-exist while gaining benefits from each other. Criminal networks are allowed to do what they wish, as long as it does not actively harm the reputation or resources of the state, with those assisting state actors getting more leeway.
- Clashes between the Russian state and Russian crime do still happen, often because a major player has either fallen out of favor with the Kremlin, or because a criminal group has begun to push the boundaries.
- As such, there is often difficulty in mapping out the full criminal network within Russia, or even understand how that network properly connects to state apparatuses or actors. Sometimes, you'll even have people working for legitimate business, and have no idea that the business also works as a front for criminal activity.
- An effect of these changes is the overall loss of the old вори culture. Crime is just seen as business now, with almost none of the original traits of the 'honest gangster' or 'thief in code'. Yet, Galeotti argues, it isn't that the воровской мир disappeared. Rather, it became the norm, with most of Russian society now adopting ideas, traditions, and strategies from the previous generations.

### Chapter 14:
- The first portion tells the tale of Rovshan Dzhaniyev in more detail, specifying how his rise to power and contribution to the criminal underworld was a bit of an anomaly. For the most part, he did not seek to create political and economic connections like many of his competitors, but he was far more willing to act out violently. This gained him some notoriety and fame among various disgruntled бандиты, as they felt out of place in the new economic models that the Russian criminal networks had created. But, this also made him unable to deal with changing economic conditions, and without enough assets to bolster his strength. By the end of 2016, Dzhaniyev was dead, and his gang had dwindled into almost nothing.
- Over the course of several financial crises faced by Russia during the 21st century(2008 and 2014), the criminal underworlds, much like their legitimate counterparts, faced severe restructuring. Some gangs, many of which didn't have good access to resources or markets, might dissolve or be integrated into another group to recoup potential losses. Others, often those who had connections to more stable markets or services, found ways to benefit from the economic downturn. Often though, this meant that they became more deeply entrenched within social and political circles, which would prove to be a problem later.
- An example is given with a gangster called Dvornik, who ran several local brothels in a Moscow neighborhood called Kapotnya. During the economic downturn of 2014, his capability to pay his men, bribe the police, and afford his own high-end lifestyle turned into an impossibility. He was eventually jailed, and much of his territory was absorbed by a man named Rak, who had connections to the wider network ran by Oniani.
- Gangs that had existing ties outside of Russian markets proved especially resilient, though it required quick restructuring and making new deals. An example is given of a gangster called Pyotr Banana, who had existing ties to Belarusian gangs, that got into smuggling foodstuffs in 2014 during Putin's sanctions. This required setting up new connections and deals with other gangs. It is unknown how the relationship will develop from here.
- Several possible routes have been identified for growth among several criminal markets. The Olympic games offered a very lucrative deal for both legitimate and illegitimate business. Putin's ban on gambling has driven much of the market underground, and the planned casinos have become hotbeds of territory grabs.
- There is also the disproportionate amount of cybercrime that has risen from Russia in the past two decades, mostly driven by those who teach themselves and others to use computers. While there is a growing legitimate market for technology within Russia, the opportunities for cybercrime drive a decent number of the computer literate to criminal enterprises. For the most part though, they are not embedded within the existing criminal networks. They appear to operate more as freelancers, who can be hired for certain tasks required.
- As it is, at the time Galeotti wrote the book in 2017, many of the elements within the criminal underworld are quite precarious. Yes, there is a diverse network that has a vested interest in keeping the peace, but there are plenty of elements and economic pressures that could tip the scales towards violence. In 2017, the status quo is that the state is the most powerful entity, and that power keeps everything in line for the time. Yet, if there is another economic crisis, a major death, or a hasty power move, then much of that could tumble down. It's more the uncertainty of how the criminal underworld will react than any assurances. 

### Chapter 15:
- The connection between state actors and criminal elements is incredibly difficult to parse out in the current landscape of Russia. Sometimes there are situations where the actions of the state appear to directly benefit the criminals, and vice-versa. Whether these effects were intentional or not is near impossible to know for certain. Yet, the regular occurrence of the symbiosis implies that there is some coordination happening at some level.
- Of recent examples, the Russian move into taking the Crimean peninsula had all the hallmarks of a coordination between Kremlin forces, local crime units, and local politicians that had supposed ties to both. Russia's deployment of the 'little green men'(зелоные человеки) appeared to coincide with a temporary ceasefire of local gangs, who took the opportunity to seize assets and property that were both politically and economically advantageous. There was also the growing rumor that Odessa was becoming a rival port city to Sevastopol, both for the Russian economy and smuggling operations.
- Following the Crimean invasion, there was the effort by Russia to instigate nationalist movements in Eastern Ukraine, which proved effective in the Donbas and Lugansk regions. While not explicitly directed at criminal forces, the momentum was quickly seized by criminals within the region looking for outside funding and support. Over time, embezzlement became a real problem for the Russians.
- As the book was written in 2017, this was before Russia itself became involved in the overall operations. While they've given their excuses why, it could be that the overall cost of sending their own troops was lesser than continuing to supply criminal enterprises, though that is simply speculation on my part.
- Then, there are the generally extrajudicial actions that criminal networks will sometimes take which appear to benefit the Kremlin almost entirely. Primarily, due to the broad group of underground Russian hackers, many cyberattacks that benefit the Kremlin are likely paid for as a service to the state. There are also cases of several people of interest being able to escape authorities through what are typically smuggling operations. Finally, politically motivated assassinations can sometimes come from people with a heavy Russian criminal background, but which does not have any connection to the assassination target.
- Though, there is a worry that the overreliance of criminal enterprises may come back to bite the Kremlin. Criminal networks, almost everywhere in the world, are usually quite adaptable to new conditions, and their strategies can morph very quickly. If the Kremlin leans on Russian crime too much, then could it possibly turn into the favor of the criminal networks, who then overturn the state as the dominant force of the nation?

### Chapter 16:
- The diffusion of criminal slang into mainstream culture denotes the level of influence that Russian crime, and especially the воровской мир, has had on Russian culture overall. It especially hints how accepting the wider social tapestry has adopted ideas from Russian criminals.
- Then, the depiction of gangsters within several forms of media, starting with novels and ending in TV shows, matches much of the evolution that Russian criminals similarly underwent. Personally, the mention of the difference between Брат and Брат 2 was especially noteworthy, as I've seen the first, and have debated whether to see the second. Now I want to, just to see the contrast.
- Another outpouring was in the adoption and transformation of the *shanson*, which is a genre of music inspired by those which came from the gulags and early criminal enterprises. While they got their inspiration from criminal life, it is not a direct connection, but more an interpretation of criminal life as sung by the mainstream.
- Overall, Russia is not in a good position to fight against the wide criminal networks that have dug in for so long. Corruption at both the top and bottom have sapped hope out of many citizens, and there is not enough momentum to properly change the situation. Yet, there is a growing sentiment that citizens are unhappy with the overall endeavor, and there are sections of various institutions that are attempting to do what they can. It is possible for Russia to turn itself around, but it's a big question of how.
- There is also the possibility for other nations to place pressure on these networks from the outside, mostly by rooting out any sort of outreach or foothold that is achieved outside of Russia. While the political situation doesn't allow us to interfere with Russia's politics, sending many of these elements back puts pressure on Russia to fix the problems at home, instead of trying to let out pressure by continuing to leak their criminal networks.
- Overall, though, there may be a sense of pessimism when it comes to Russia and crime. Yet, there are those who hold an optimism that Russia will eventually learn to fix these problems, and that more stability will be achieved, both nationally and internationally.
# Notable Quotes:
## Part 1 - Foundations:
### Chapter 1:

>Instead, order in the village was largely the preserve of *samosud* (‘self-judging’), a surprisingly nuanced form of lynch law, whereby the members of the commune applied their own moral code to offenders, regardless or even in defiance of the state’s laws. This has been best studied by Cathy Frierson, who concluded that – contrary to the opinions of many police and state officials of the time – it was not mindless violence but a process with its own logic and its own principles.
>-Page 14

>The Russian language contains two very distinct words for crime: *prestupleniye*, an essentially technical definition, a breach of the law, and *zlodeyanie*, which carries with it a moral judgement.32 Tellingly, the peasant proverb had it that ‘God punishes sins, and the state punishes guilt’. Such poaching may have been *prestupleniye*, but the peasants certainly did not see it as *zlodeyanie* because the landlord had more than enough wood for his personal needs, and ‘God grew the forest for everyone’. It could even be interpreted as an act of social banditry, a petty redistribution of wealth from the exploiter to the exploited. In the eyes of the eighteenth-century traveller the Marquis de Custine, the serfs had to be ‘on guard against their masters, who \[were\] constantly acting towards them with open and shameless bad faith’, and so they in turn would ‘compensate themselves by artifice what they suffer through injustice’.
>-Page 16

### Chapter 2:

>The urban gangster was a product of the slums of a rapidly urbanising late-tsarist Russia, the so-called yamy, where life was cheap and miserable. It was in the drinking dens and dosshouses of the yamy that the subculture of the vorovskoi mir emerged, the ‘thieves’ world’. Its code, of separation from and contempt for mainstream society and its values – nation, church, family, charity – became one of the few unifying forces within this milieu, and would become a central part of the macho beliefs of the twentieth-century Russian vory. It was not that the criminals had no codes or values, but rather that they picked, chose and invented them as best suited their needs.
>-Page 22

>‘Mishka Yaponchik’ – his real name was Mikhail Vinnitsky – was a particular such legend in his own lifetime. The son of a carter, given his nickname ‘the Japanese’ apparently for his bony face and dark, slanted eyes, he was an ambitious and audacious gangster from an early age, with the charisma to attract others of the same mould to his side. He soon acquired a formidable reputation in Odessa and the police would reportedly turn a blind eye so long as he avoided them and left the neighbourhoods of the rich be. As he rose to become the foremost mobster of the city, he became rich on tributes from other gangs and extorted from businesses. He made no efforts to hide this status, promenading through the most fashionable haunts in a dandyish cream-coloured suit, bow tie and straw boater, always accompanied by his bodyguards. He would hold court in Café Fankoni, where a table was always reserved for him, alongside the city’s other successful businessmen. From time to time, like any magnanimous monarch, he would hold street parties, with tin buckets of vodka and tables of free food. ‘Yaponchik’ would end up a casualty of the post-revolutionary civil war, killed in Voznesensk in 1920, but for five years the so-called ‘King of the Moldavanka’ would stand as a symbol of the Odessan gangster made good.
>-Page 33

### Chapter 3:

>Stalin does not seem to have been a triggerman or safecracker himself, but rather a fixer who found common cause with ‘thieves’ in it for the money, not (or at least not only) for the ideology. In 1907, for example, he organised the ambush of a stagecoach carrying cash to the Imperial Bank in Tbilisi, in which almost forty people died under a hail of gunfire and improvised grenades. The gangsters fled with a third of a million rubles, although most of this haul ended up unusable because it was in large-denomination notes whose serial numbers were quickly circulated throughout Europe. The actual rough stuff was in the hands of a ruthless Armenian, Simon Ter-Petrossian, known as ‘Kamo’, who already had his own gang and was as much a *vor* as a revolutionary.
>-Page 36
Further Info(NtR): [1907 Tiflis bank robbery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1907_Tiflis_bank_robbery)
 Source(NtR): [Kamo--the Legendary Old Bolshevik of the Caucasus](https://www.jstor.org/stable/126539) ^KamoQuote

>By identifying the rich and the petty criminal as the enemies of socialism, Lenin was implicitly exempting the not-so-petty criminal, making him a potential ally. This was just one of the compromises made during the civil war that would shape the rest of the Soviet era. Although the new government adopted draconian policies – the Military Revolutionary Committee warned that ‘at the first attempt by dark elements to cause confusion, robbery, bloodshed or shooting on the streets of Petrograd, the criminal responsible will be wiped off the face of the earth’ – in practice ‘confusion, robbery, bloodshed or shooting’ abounded. In 1918, robberies and murders were at ten to fifteen times the prewar level and Lenin himself was not immune to the lawlessness of the period.
>Page 38 ^LeninCriminal

>The phenomenon of *besprizornost* would survive through the 1920s, and bring with it the associated challenges of begging, theft and even violence. Tales abounded – sometimes exaggerated, but sadly too often accurate – of gangs of teenagers or even younger children not only engaging in petty theft but mobbing and sometimes killing victims in gangs ten, twenty, thirty strong. Joseph Douillet, the last Belgian consul to the prewar USSR, witnessed the endgame to a rising in the Persianovka children’s camp, where some twenty-five youths from Novocherkassk armed themselves with knives and guns and took the camp, holding it for almost a week before soldiers came to restore order.
>-Page 40 ^YouthViolence

>Through this constant mingling of criminals from across the Soviet Union, the *vorovskoi mir* became ever more homogeneous and interconnected, a veritable ‘gangster archipelago’. In the process, the camp system strengthened and transmitted this distinctive subculture, at once enforcing and teaching underworld orthodoxy. Thus, for example, Vyatlag camp was described in its own prison newspaper, *Za zheleznoi reshyotkoi* (‘Behind Iron Bars’), as ‘a real school’ offering ‘courses of the second stage of moral training for future skilled, “stylish” criminals’. This was not just about indoctrinating criminals into a common culture, it was also about the communication of professional skills. In its own vicious way, the Stalin regime was bringing about rapid urbanisation and industrialisation and, as during late tsarism, this generated increased specialisation and stratification within the underworld, just as for the rest of society. Such professional classifiers ranged from the *farmazonshiki*, counterfeit-currency dealers (who would also often palm *kukly*, ‘dolls’, onto unwitting marks: a bundle of fake notes or even just scrap paper, with real notes at the top and bottom to fool the eye), to the *gonsha* (‘shoe’), a pickpocket working the crowded buses and trams at rush hour.
>-Page 45 ^GulagVorovskoiMir

>The key point is that the camp system was the crucible in which the loose vorovskoi mir that had emerged in late nineteenth-century Russia would not only become increasingly homogeneous, including embracing non-Slavic nationalities, but also acquire what it had always lacked, some kind of hierarchy. The dog-eat-dog struggle for daily survival in the Gulags, summar-ised in the precept ‘you die today, and I’ll die tomorrow’, only deepened the cultural ties amongst the blatnye, and the gulf between them and the rest of society.
>-Page 47

### Chapter 4:

>Just as Stalin’s policies unified the vorovskoi mir on one level, they also divided it on another, creating a new body of collaborators, the so-called suki (‘bitches’), who were willing to help the state run the Gulags, but only in their own interests. The challenge for the Stalinist state was how best to manage the massive influx of convicts, and to do so cheaply and efficiently. While the primary initial motivation of the purges and the mass incarcerations was political, the state also sought to exploit this virtually enslaved workforce for economic gain. As a Polish-born zek, Gustav Herling, put it, ‘the whole system of forced labour in Soviet Russia – in all its stages, the interrogations and hearings, the preliminary imprisonment, and the camp itself – is intended primarily not to punish the criminal, but rather to exploit him economically and transform him psychologically’.
>-Page 51

>Nonetheless, especially by the later 1930s, even members of the vorovskoi mir became tempted by the opportunities of collaboration. The traditionalists within the vorovskoi mir despised these quislings. They became outcasts, the otoshedshie (‘departed’), more commonly and vitriolically known as suki (‘bitches’). Their lives were forfeit in the eyes of the blatnye, who increasingly also called themselves chestnyagy, ‘the unconverted’.
>-Page 52 ^chestnyagy

>People’s Defence Committee Order No. 227, issued following the disaster that was the decimation of the Soviet defensive line in the initial German onslaught, envisaged that hundreds of thousands of convicts would be rushed to penal battalions, originally punishment units for deserters and malcontents. In the first three years of the war, almost a million Gulag inmates were transferred into the Red Army.
>-Page 54 ^order227

>The vory and regular criminals who had served in the army and were now considered to have broken their code were joined by maybe half a million former soldiers and partisans whose ‘crime’ had been to be captured by the enemy when Stalin expected – demanded – that they fight to the death. For them, ‘liberation’ meant an inglorious transfer from a foreign prison camp to a Soviet one. Over a third of a million Red Army soldiers ended up in the NKVD’s ‘verification and filtration camps’, and while most were eventually freed to civilian life or returned into the military, at least a third of them ended up in the Gulag.
>-Page 54 ^pows

>Increasingly, camp authorities actively began to seek to convert or break the traditionalists. Varlam Shalamov, for example, recounted the tale he had heard in 1948, of convicts arriving at Vanino transit prison forced to strip, so that the thieves could be identified by their tattoos.21 They were offered the choice between ritually forsaking their code and death, with many choosing the latter. It is unclear if this actually happened, or whether it was just one of the myths that circulate in any information-scarce society, but the authorities certainly did use the blatnye’s own customs against them, not least identifying them by their ink. They also demanded that traditionalists publicly recant their old ways, by carrying out some symbolic act of labour (such as raking the forbidden zone between fences, which was kept cleared to show footprints), locking the door of a barracks, and sitting and eating with other collaborators. That way, they were irredeemably ‘departed’ from the blatnoi community, and could not go back.
>-Page 57

>In terms of the big picture, the collaborators won, for a variety of reasons. They often had numbers on their side, and the ex-soldiers brought with them military experience: the blatnye might be tough individually, but so were their enemies, and many of them were used to fighting as units. Perhaps most importantly, the suki had the support of the regime. The authorities found a variety of ways to tilt the balance, whether by allowing them to dominate camp careers such as cook and barber – which meant knives and razors – or by giving them access to work tools such as axes and shovels. They could also move groups of prisoners like armies in the field, concentrating them in individual camps until they had wiped out the blatnye there, and then moving them on to the next.
>-Page 58 ^bitcheswar

>So the suki had won, albeit at the cost of playing their part in rendering the Gulags virtually ungovernable. Nonetheless, win they did, and reshaped the vorovskoi mir in their own image. They retained most of the code, and the culture of brazen and merciless dog-eat-dog predation, but they rewrote the prohibition on collaboration with the state. It now became permissible, so long as it was in the criminal’s interest. When the Gulags were opened, these collaborator-criminals were amongst the first to be released, and over the following decade they would impose their own vision of the code across the Soviet underworld, by threat, persuasion and violence. The way would be open for a new generation of vory to collaborate with dishonest Party functionaries when they felt it was in their interests. This was Stalin’s toxic legacy to the Soviet Union.
>-Page 60 ^newvory

### Chapter 5:
>The evidence suggests that the distinctive culture of the vorovskoi mir did not die out in the 1960s, but certainly became far less powerful and ubiquitous, only to be recreated as the vory reinvented themselves from the 1970s onwards. As such, their folkways would be a pallid and half-remembered reflection of the powerful, vital and brutal culture of the vory’s heyday.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 62). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Before the camps, the vorovskoi mir was about a subculture rather than a structure. Individual gangs had their own hierarchies, and cities and regions might have informal pecking orders, but there were no wider assemblages of power. The emergence of the vory v zakone as the authority figures, and the increasing homogenisation of criminal culture in the forcing houses of the Gulag camps, likewise did not create some nationwide shadow state. The vory were too independent minded, and Stalin’s regime too paranoid about anything resembling a conspiracy, to allow that. Indeed, even individual vory v zakone were not necessarily gang leaders, and not every gang leader was necessarily a vor v zakone. Rather, the ‘thieves within the code’ represented moral authority within the vorovskoi mir: people to be listened to, people to be shown respect.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 62). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Now, languages are not just a medium of communication, they are also expressions of values, histories, cultural influences and social activities. They are alive, constantly changing meanings, assimilating new coinages and losing old ones. They embody the environment in which they emerge and develop, and both reflect and shape the thoughts, concerns and interests of those who use them. Studying a language is thus also a means of studying those who speak it.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 65). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Originally, the vorovskoi mir was simply a culture which arose amongst outsiders excluded from mainstream society by poverty and ill fortune. Increasingly, though, there emerged a strand within it that did not just accept but embraced and exalted this exclusion. It actively turned its back on the mainstream, starting a process which would lead to the rise of the blatnye criminals.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 69-70). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>And they sang. In the days before Uber transformed the world of Moscow’s taxis, anyone using a cab would likely be blasted by the throatily saccharine sound of Radio Shanson, a station specifically dedicated to the shanson, a genre of ballad not confined to but very heavily influenced by the music of the Gulags. By definition, this made it very much the music of the vorovskoi mir, and blatnaya pesnya (‘thieves’ songs’) are a popular genre even today. The later popularisation of the genre is discussed in chapter 16, but for the thieves in the Gulag, music became a way to safely express their feelings, from their hopes and dreams of the outside, to their anger and despair inside the zona. Perhaps it is not surprising that one of the common terms for living a criminal life was po muzyke khodit, ‘to move to the music’.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 74-75). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The code of the pre-Stalinist vorovskoi mir had demanded that, when one joined the fraternity, one severed all existing ties – to church, to family, to wife – as a mark of one’s new commitment. In practice, many remained married, but the unfortunate wife was considered within the underworld now to be little more than gang chattel: her husband’s first, but that of another member of the gang were he to die or be imprisoned. She was lucky enough to be considered of greater status than a prostitute – arguably not the highest bar to vault – but in Valery Chalidze’s words, ‘the relationship of a thief and his wife is that of master and slave’.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 76). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
## Part 2 - Emergence:
### Chapter 6:
>It is a perverse irony that the true midwives of organised crime in today’s Russia are to be found in an unlikely and disparate trinity of Soviet general secretaries: Stalin the tyrant, Brezhnev the manager and Gorbachev the reformer. Stalin created the collaborator-criminal willing to work with self-interested elements of the elite. Brezhnev presided over a Soviet Union characterised by corruption and the black market, turning the new vory increasingly towards the informal economy. And Gorbachev shattered the state, but also unleashed new market forces that the vory would prove best placed to exploit.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 81). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The vory found themselves within this strange new world. The irony was that, while the suki had won the cultural – and very physical – war in the camps, and were amongst the first to be released in the amnesties following Stalin’s death, they were emerging into a USSR whose underworld was still dominated by the blatnye. The result was a renewed struggle, in which again their key assets – a capacity to organise and a willingness to work through and with the authorities – ensured that the suki won. It was a patchwork victory, a neighbourhood here, a township there.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 85). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Outside the labour camp system, though, the biggest gang in town was undoubtedly the Communist Party and the opportunists who had risen under Stalin. With understandable hyperbole, David Remnick calls it ‘the most gigantic mafia the world has ever known’,11 but this was a view shared in the underworld. As the professional pickpocket ‘Zhora the Engineer’ put it, ‘there certainly is a Soviet mafia. And it’s organised a hell of a lot better than the American mafia. But it has another name. It’s called the Communist Party. We wouldn’t dream of trying to compete with it.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 86). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>One perverse irony of this situation was that it also contributed to the rise of marginalised and violent street gangs. Back in the day, many of the more aggressive and charismatic young street toughs would have drifted into the vorovskoi mir and the discipline that entailed. As it was, though, their anti-social proclivities, magnified by the absence of alternative outlets and activities beyond the stultifying banalities of the Young Communist movement, had to find other outlets. The so-called ‘Kazan phenomenon’16 – because it was first properly recognised in that city – followed a classic pattern, as adolescents clustered around territorial divisions, particular affiliations (such as following the same football team) or even large factories, to hang out and brawl. Indeed, this had been a staple of village life until the 1960s, and was simply transposed into the cities. Fights, often conducted with a kind of rough-and-ready ritual and rules, let young men blow off steam, demonstrate their masculine virtues and establish hierarchies.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 88). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>In an era when even the most powerful and highly praised figures within the system were deeply and enthusiastically involved in corruption to maintain their privileged existences, is it any surprise that ordinary citizens, experiencing a relative decline in their standards of living, likewise turned to illegal means? To an extent, this meant corruption. But it also meant an ever-deeper relationship with the underground economy.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 92). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Much of the underground economy was in the hands of petty fartsovshchiki, black-market wheeler-dealers, but it was big business, and could not have developed as far as it did without close ties with corrupt Party officials. The more powerful and ambitious tsekhoviki (or tenevniki, ‘shadow men’) needed these connections not just for their own survival, but often to gain access to raw materials, facilities and labour. Many fartsovshchiki dealt in illegally imported defitsitny goods, from clothes to decadent Western music, or ran illegal money exchange scams. The legendary Yan Rokotov, ‘Cross Eyes’, who was said to have amassed a fortune of 20 million rubles by the time of his arrest at the end of 1960, started earning serious money trading vodka for Western clothes off the backs of thirsty Finnish tourists, before he later went into more ambitious schemes dealing in foreign currency (with a side-line in outright fraud).27 However, the greater part of the underground economy was accounted for by domestic goods, whether diverted from official production or made in underground factories.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 92-93). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Everything became increasingly institutionalised: black marketeers would pay local gangsters a tax, while the vory, possibly in conscious mockery of the Party but more likely assimilating its language and methods, began holding more such congresses of gang leaders on issues including whether to deal drugs, how to respond to changes in policing and even, at a meeting in Tbilisi in 1982, whether to get involved with politics.33 (The result was inconclusive: Georgian vory wanted to get closer to corrupt officials, Russian traditionalists under the vor ‘Vaska Brilliant’ were reluctant, and the meeting ended without a firm decision.)

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 96). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 7:
>Three key aspects of the Gorbachev era were crucial in revolutionising organised crime. First, his well-intentioned but ill-conceived anti-alcohol campaign did for Soviet gangsters something a little like what prohibition did for their North American counterparts. Second, a limited liberalisation of the economy and the creation of a new form of private business (the so-called cooperatives) provided the criminals with new victims for extortion and opportunities to launder all the cash they were making through alcohol sales. Finally, the collapse in the authority of the state meant that just at the time when they were acquiring unprecedented financial and coercive resources – money and muscle – the criminals also faced no serious controls. They no longer had to rely on the payments of the black-market barons as they had their own sources of income; the corrupt Party bosses now needed their protection rather than the other way round. In short, the pyramid upended itself, leaving the gangsters on top for a while.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 98). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>For most people, the first time they ever knowingly encountered the vory was not as predators but as suppliers. The gangsters found themselves making more money than ever, in the unexpected role of friend and ally. One young man who was at that time a mere shestyorka, a gang runner or gofer, described the surreal experience of his first time accompanying an older criminal on his rounds in a housing estate in Moscow’s southern Chertanovo neighbourhood: ‘People were pleased to see us, they would smile and joke, offer us cigarettes. They would ask us what we had today, like we were shopkeepers.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 100). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>In the process, the criminals – who until recently had depended largely on the black market and on black marketeers for their revenue – found themselves increasingly financially solvent. Criminals who had once run small-time rackets were now dreaming bigger. In Perm, for example, the gangster Vladimir Plotnikov (‘Plotnik’) had largely concentrated on fraudulent street games of chance until the mid-1980s, but then moved into black-market business, smuggling chainsaws from the local Dzerzhinsky plant across the USSR, 200 at a time.14 In 2004, he went on to become a local parliamentarian. Other gangsters became service providers even more explicitly; the Muscovite vor Pavel Zikharov (‘Pavel Tsirul’) began as a pickpocket in the 1950s, but by the later 1980s he was living in a three-storey villa outside the city and lending money off the official record to kooperativniki who could not get commercial loans.15 A thuggish generation of predators was having to evolve, or else it would be supplemented or replaced by a new breed of gangster-businessmen.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 102-103). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>As for the afgantsy, they were typically marked by their experiences not only in war, but also in peace. Veterans of a conflict Moscow did not want to acknowledge (in the early years, the state flatly denied that there were Soviet soldiers in Afghanistan and veterans were ordered to keep quiet about it), they were often scapegoated by society and neglected by the state. Promises of proper medical attention, of jobs, of decent housing, all tended to be broken. This was less because of any real prejudice against them than because they were a politically marginalised group competing for resources in a time of extreme scarcity.22 Nonetheless, for many this led to a degree of ‘shadow socialisation’ in which they actively turned against mainstream society and its values.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 104-105). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>For both the sportsmen and the Afghan War veterans, the post-Soviet 1990s would see their criminal careers at their peak. The combination of generous tax exemptions (which created opportunities for smuggling), struggling law enforcement and seemingly boundless opportunities for racketeering and corruption briefly opened up bloody new vistas for them, before they were again brought under the control of state and conventional gangsters in the 2000s. However, even in the later 1980s, already it was clear that new markets for violence and protection were emerging, and power and money would flow to those groups and individuals best able to secure and service them.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 105-106). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>By the time Gorbachev was forced to bow to the inevitable and, at the end of 1991, sign the USSR out of existence, organised crime had become a visible and powerful presence in the streets, in the economy and even within the political scene. A few days before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, some thirty senior vory from across the country had gathered for a skhodka at a dacha near Moscow.32 The aim was nothing less than to hammer out some understandings about the Soviet underworld, even as the whole Soviet state was near death. There was an agreement about a common front against the gangs from the north Caucasus, and tentative accords about dividing the country between them.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 107). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 8:
>Just as the 1990s saw Russia go through financial and political crises as it tried to define itself and its place in the world, its underworld spent most of the decade expanding rapidly into every corner of the economy and society but also getting involved in running turf wars as gangs rose, fell, united, divided and competed. This was a decade of drive-by shootings, car bombs and the virtual theft of whole industries, in which the forces of order seemed powerless. In 1994, President Yeltsin declared that Russia was the ‘biggest mafia state in the world’.8 He almost sounded proud of it; certainly he did not do much to stop it, and cronies of his were deeply involved in this arrant criminalisation of the country. From this anarchy, though, a new order would emerge, as major underworld combines formed, pecking orders emerged and territorial boundaries became established. As for the vory, it was time for another renewal, another reinvention to fit the very different needs and opportunities of the time.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 111). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The headlong rush to privatise state assets transferred many into criminal hands at bargain basement prices. Likewise, limited democratisation created corrupt local fiefdoms which resembled nothing so much as the snake-pit municipalities of interwar America, familiar from Dashiell Hammett’s noir thrillers – but with Kalashnikovs and the internet. Perhaps most insidious and corrosive was the widespread sense of insecurity and uncertainty; the new laws were contradictory, the old certainties were gone. If you needed a contract enforcing or a debt collecting, to whom could you turn when the courts were corrupt and backlogged? If you needed protection and security, who could provide it when the police were corrupt and inefficient? The answer, needless to say, was organised crime, which emerged perversely as an entrepreneurial Robin Hood, offering these very services – for a fee.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 112). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The boundaries between politics, business and crime were at best hazy, at worse meaningless, as criminals and politicians openly hobnobbed with each other and the tools and attitudes of organised crime came to permeate the system as a whole.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 113). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>In the violence, there was a hint of restraint, a sense that you tried to avoid wars, even if you won them when they must be fought, and a clear commitment to following through on threats and promises alike. Reflecting the role of these ‘enforcement partnerships’, though – and without some form of trust, how can there be a partnership in a time without enforcement mechanisms? – their ponyatiya also put great emphasis on being reliable in positive as well as negative terms. It was not enough simply not to make threats without being able to back them up, it was necessary to make good on one’s promises, too. The old code had essentially considered promises made to frayery, non-criminals, as having no real weight. Now, that was bad for business and, in the form of the post-Soviet ponyatiya, the code once again rewrote itself to adapt to the needs of the times.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 116-117). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Likewise, most gangs were happy to accept these new rules of the game, not least because the mob wars of the 1990s had already played themselves out. Turf boundaries had largely been agreed and hierarchies established, and further conflicts would be bad for business. The result was that higher-order organised crime became increasingly regularised, corpor-ately minded and integrated with elements of the state. When gangs did turn to razborka, the violent settling of scores – as sometimes they inevitably did – it was in a far more precise and targeted way, the sniper’s bullet supplanting the indiscriminate car bomb or drive-by shooting that had been such a bloody fixture of the 1990s.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 119). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
## Part 3 - Varieties:
### Chapter 9:
>Kostya’s story encapsulates many of the features of this thoroughly post-modern underworld. At first, he was a member of a gang, then later a gang leader and criminal-businessman in his own right. He was also a member of wider networks. He was initially loosely connected with a St Petersburg network and strongly tied to a Muscovite one, and then later (briefly) swapped over. Compared with other underworlds where identity is relatively fixed and allegiance determined by birth or ethnicity, Russia’s criminals enjoy a protean existence in which everything can be redefined or even combined, as the needs of the moment require.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 126). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Overall, the Russian underworld is defined not by hierarchical structures like the Italian mafia or Japanese yakuza but by a complex and varied underworld ecosystem. There are myriad territorially based groups, some controlling just a housing estate or a neighbourhood, others cities and regions, such as Uralmash, described below. However, there is no single nationwide hierarchy. In so far as there are major structures reaching across city limits, regional boundaries and even national borders, there are a few gruppirovki: loose, flexible organisations more like networks than anything else. How many? Precisely because of their loose, sometimes overlapping natures, there is no consensus.3 I have heard figures from a very implausible three (presented by an academic at the Interior Ministry Academy in 2014, who said they were the Slavic, Chechen and Georgian networks) through to twenty-plus. It all depends on how one counts and defines them, but the consensus seems to be between six and twelve.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 126). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>These larger networks exist to provide a series of benefits for their members, whether gangs or individuals. They provide access to criminal opportunities and services and presumably reliable contacts who can help a member develop some new venture or respond to a challenge. In a rapidly evolving business climate, today’s protection racketeer may want tomorrow to get involved in heroin trafficking: where to find the drugs or venture capital such an operation needs? The network thus acts as a source of proven and hopefully reliable investment and capacity.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 127). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Uralmash has become something more like a club of powerful criminal-businessmen, numbering between fourteen and eighteen, who closely coordinate the operations of their respective outfits, maintaining tight discipline but a low profile. It retains many of the characteristics of its earlier incarnations, including a reluctance to include non-Slavs, probably reflecting both the relatively crude nationalism of its founders and their continued struggle to hold their position on east–west trafficking routes against encroachments of north Caucasian gangs from the south-west and Central Asians from the south-east. Its evolution demonstrates both that many local gangs within Russia will tend to adopt more basic and traditional forms, and also that these models have distinct limitations when the organisations acquire greater economic and political ambitions. As Uralmash demonstrated, when those contradictions bite, the group can either diffuse into a network or retrench back onto its core criminal activities. In many places, we see the former, but Uralmash decided on the latter, simpler course.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 133). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>‘Regional hierarchies’ are relatively rare, and the Russian experience would seem to suggest they are generally only encountered in circumstances in which an artificial degree of centralisation is required by some kind of external pressure. This could be a political leadership that insists on dealing with a single counterpart and in turn demands that this interlocutor be able to discipline his subordinates as the price for continued survival. Or else it could be an external threat that forces otherwise hostile gangs to create a common structure in the face of a greater foe. The rise (and fall) of the Far Eastern Association of Thieves demonstrates both.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 133-134). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The Russian Far East quickly became an area of interest for Chinese criminals, even before the legitimate investment that is now reshaping the region.17 Chinese merchants established shuttle-trading networks across the border to sell cheap, stolen and counterfeit goods. These traders were prey to protection racketeers on both sides of the border. Russo-Chinese joint ventures proved particular targets: in 1994, the deputy director of one was killed in Nakhodka; in 1995 the Khabarovsk offices of another were gutted by grenades; in 1996, Chinese gangsters tried to kidnap three Chinese business people in Vladivostok. However, these commercial contacts also brought with them interested potential collaborators from the Chinese underworld. Drugs, weapons, illegal migrants and then eventually timber, raw materials, rare wildlife and other more recondite commodities began to be traded, and the Russians also became launderers for a growing share of Chinese criminal cash. As it became clear that the potential profits were immense, gangs in such gateway cities as Vladivostok, Blagoveshchensk and Khabarovsk fought over these connections. However, the Chinese criminal market was just too big for any one or two gangs to service, the local political authorities wanted to ensure no one scared off this gold-egg-laying goose, and the varyag threat loomed.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 135-136). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Of the route’s total flow, more than a third stays in Russia. According to official figures, almost 6 per cent of the country’s population, some 8.5 million people, are drug addicts or regular users.26 The key challenge is the growing proportion of users becoming addicts and the use of harder and more dangerous narcotics. Some 90 per cent of drug addicts use heroin at least part of the time, making Russia the world’s leading heroin-using nation per capita; highly dangerous drugs such as krokodil (desomorphine), which rots away users’ flesh, are also making considerable headway, with the consequent impact on mortality. Russians consume some 20 per cent of global heroin production.27 The remainder heads west into Europe or east and south into China, where it is largely sold in wholesale quantities to local gangs for resale.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 139). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The bulk of the route’s drug trafficking is in the hands of collectives of local gangs, which over time may assume the characteristics of a ‘clustered hierarchy’ as their relationships become settled and they come to depend on the heroin business, which entails everyone carrying out their role within the enterprise. The shipments handled in this way tend to be individually smaller but more numerous than those of the major networks, and are generally transported by couriers and in cars or trucks. The component gangs usually take their fee in a share of the heroin, to be sold locally for profit and to defray operational costs, or even passed on to gang members as compensation for their work. Thus, this form of trafficking disproportionately contributes to the domestic heroin market. This is also the main way trafficking to China is handled, not least as the major networks have not yet reached an agreement over access. Gangs therefore tend to move drugs to border cities and then sell on to Chinese counterparts operating under the cover of import–export businesses or shuttle traders.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 140). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Throughout such a process, there has to be operational security against rival gangs, law enforcement and gang members. There has to be close coordination to manage the handovers and limit how long the drugs are in the pipeline, time in which they are vulnerable and unprofitable. In this case, the journey from Tashkent to Moscow took just nine days. Furthermore, given that the main profit is downstream, where the drugs are sold close to the retail dealers, and the main costs upstream, where they are initially bought, there has to be faith in an equitable distribution of revenues. Successfully and profitably navigating this complex process thus encourages long-term relationships. There is a huge potential profit to be made, but the time and risks involved in establishing the relationships in the first place are considerable. Having done so, the incentive is to maintain those sequential relationships, something which will often require the subordination of gangs’ individual autonomy to the collective venture. Over time, there has been a tendency for the most durable and effective operations to become increasingly integrated and, in particular, for a common set of rules and procedures to be established. These rules will be enforced by some coordinating body, made up sometimes of trusted third parties paid for their role (this is a classic job for vory v zakone) or, more often, a council of representatives of all the stakeholding gangs. In this case, ‘Khveli’, ‘Mikhail Taksista’ and ‘Behruz’ formed the unofficial governing council. They paid ‘Parovoz’ for his role directly out of their share as they had a common interest in keeping the process ‘honest’. After all, they had sunk considerable time, money and social capital into establishing this route and they wanted it to last.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 141-142). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The business-minded avtoritety remained dominant within the organisation, but they had to accept that they lacked the ability to run the gang like a single integrated business and also that they could not move wholly away from their street crime roots. They could also not afford to appear to be challenging the state. As a result, the name Tambovskaya is now little heard in St Petersburg, even though the network remains a key player not just in the city and the surrounding Leningrad region but throughout the Russian north-west. Its operations stretch over 1,000 kilometres north to Murmansk, over 700 kilometres north-east to Arkhangelsk and almost 1,000 kilometres south-west to Kaliningrad. It has largely devolved to numerous smaller outfits and operators and moved into new businesses such as methamphetamines and counterfeit goods. The role of the core appears now primarily be to resolve disputes, protect the network as a whole (especially against incursions by ‘highlanders’ from the north Caucasus) and to manage international flows of goods – drugs, people, stolen cars, counterfeit wares – and money.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 144-145). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Such networks can in a sense best be conceptualised as clubs: membership tends to be informal, bestowed through connections and the sponsorship of key individuals. Some of these individuals are the heads of more powerful brigady within the organisation, but others are simply rich, connected or charismatic enough to have authority. The links may be ongoing or occasional, strong or weak, tense or harmonious. They can easily be based on sentiment: while the Orekhovo gang is no more, there is still a perceptible core of criminals who used to work for Sergei Timofeyev and retain close connections, for old times’ sake as much as anything else. The fundamental point, though, is that for at least a decade it has been impossible to talk of Solntsevo, as an organisation, actually doing anything. There is no central control, no real discipline to do more than expel or punish those who break the informal rules of the network. Solntsevo has become so successful it has transcended criminal organisation.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 148-149). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 10:
>As it was, Borz was the soul of congeniality. I was immediately reminded that, while most Chechens are Muslims, they typically bear their faith lightly and flexibly as he produced a bottle of vodka and insisted that we toast not only friendship and health, but also Muhammad, may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. He proved delighted to talk, even as he deflected certain specific questions, and was a natural storyteller. In many ways, his tales outlined the very trajectory of the Chechens in recent decades and the ways whereby they became the most feared (and mythologised) players in the Russian underworld, not least the effects of Russian oppression: as he put it, ‘the Russians taught me to want to kill, and then they taught me how to do it well’.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 151). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The Chechens, a people whose national animal is the wolf, take a perverse pride in the hardships they have endured, with some reason, given that they have survived, unbroken and untamed. While the 1990s saw the resumption of their on-and-off struggle for independence, it also saw the extraordinary rise of the Chechen bratva (‘brotherhood’) within the Russian underworld.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 151). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>If the Slavic gangs have predominance in political and probably economic power within the Russian underworld and the Georgians the most vory – though not most members as a whole – then what is the distinctive asset for the ‘highlanders’ of the north Caucasus, and particularly the Chechens? The answer would appear to be cohesion and reputation.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 154). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Banditry and resistance are deeply ingrained within the Chechen national identity, not least in the traditional figure of the abreg (also rendered as abrek), the honourable outlaw whose banditry is driven by righteous vendetta or a refusal to knuckle under before the crimes of the powerful.9 The abreg is a self-sufficient and wily figure, a Caucasus Robin Hood, who often gathers a gang of like-minded daredevils around him, raiding the rich, feeding the poor, protecting the weak and dismaying the corrupt. While essentially mythological, the figure of the abreg still provides a degree of legitimacy to the modern gangster.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 155). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Genuine tragedies make for powerful national folklore, and onto the abreg’s role as bandit was overlaid that of national freedom fighter. His may be an ultimately futile battle, as the state, whether tsarist, Soviet or post-Soviet, has always had overwhelming force on its side, but the abreg way is precisely to fight the good fight regardless. Khasukha Magomadov, the so-called ‘last abreg’, who fought the Soviets during the Second World War, was eventually killed in 1976, at the age of seventy-one, when his hideout was stormed by a combined KGB and police team. He was shot, a TT pistol still in his hand.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 155). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The gangsters’ pursuit of money, power and a high-rolling lifestyle did not fit with the jihadists’ puritan ideals – and, more to the point, with an open challenge to the Russian state and the repressions that would trigger. As a result, for example, when Al-Qaeda sought to procure weapons for its allies in 2000, Chechen gangs again refused to cooperate, and the jihadists ended up paying ethnic Russian criminal gangs, who smuggled the weapons into Chechnya using military supply convoys.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 158). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Generally, the Chechens were involved largely in protection racketeering and some prostitution, but several, including Altangeriyev and Nukhayev, were rumoured to maintain good links with the KGB. In particular, the security agencies would turn a blind eye to their foreign currency dealing, in return for useful information about the tourists and travellers they encountered.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 160). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The police have guns and badges, but the Chechens have something far more terrifying at their disposal: guns and folklore. Russians are, in a way, victims of their own literature. Nineteenth-century works such as Tolstoy’s Hadji Murat and Pushkin’s Prisoner of the Caucasus imparted a sometimes admiring, sometimes horrified picture of the Chechen as a fierce primitive who would never shirk from a fight, an impression only solidified by their performance during the Chechen wars. As a result, there is a general assumption that, to quote one gang hanger-on, ‘you don’t mess with the Chechens. If you challenge them, even if they know they will lose, they will fight, and they’ll summon their brothers and their cousins and their uncles and keep fighting. Even if they are going to lose, they’ll fight just to bring you down, too. They are maniacs.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 162). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>There are thus still ‘two Chechnyas’. One, the mother country itself, features sometimes on trafficking routes, including heroin from Afghanistan and women into the Middle East. However, it is really best considered a single criminal–feudal operation, where the primary business is diverting and embezzling state funds.46 So long as Kadyrov controls the government – and the 20,000 or so Kadyrovtsy – and Moscow feels it cannot afford to move against him, this situation is likely to continue. The other Chechnya, the Chechen criminal diaspora, has developed its own distinctive niche elsewhere in Russia, one largely built on its reputation for timeworn gangster virtues of honour and implacable vendetta. Are these old-style gangsters in a new underworld? Or, given the emergence of the ‘Chechen franchise’ and their capacity to prey on the predators, are they in fact very modern, simply leveraging a traditional (and sometimes mythologised) image to build themselves a formidable brand?

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 165). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 11:
>The Soviet Union’s slide into institutionalised corruption in the 1960s and 1970s meant that, despite overt campaigns against ‘speculation’, bribe taking, embezzlement and theft, there emerged ‘organised criminal clans of a new type which brought together professional criminals, black marketeers – the clients of whom existed amongst bureaucrats at the highest level – and corrupt law enforcement officials’.7 The role of the vory v zakone, known in Georgian as kanonieri qurdi, was as elsewhere often to be the connector between these various worlds. Furthermore, they were active and numerous: according to Soviet police data, as of the end of the USSR, one in three of all vory v zakone were Georgians, even though they made up only one in fifty of the total population.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 168). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>In keeping with their nation’s lively traditions of black marketeering and corrupt politics, the Georgian vory were the first and most enthusiastic to involve themselves in politics and then take full advantage of Gorbachev’s reforms of the 1980s. To a considerable extent, this was down to the authority and initiative of Dzhaba Ioseliani. A vor v zakone, convicted bank robber and killer, in 1982 he convened a skhodka in Tbilisi at which he advocated, largely with success, that the criminals actively seek to infiltrate and control local political institutions. Even by this time, the Georgian vory felt much less strictly bound by the traditional codes of the vorovskoi mir, establishing gangs based around family and kin and handing power from father to son in a dynastic manner technically proscribed by the rules of the underworld. This meant, however, that they were able to mesh much more closely and directly with Georgia’s kin-based politics, and thus they had a head-start on their criminal counterparts elsewhere in burrowing into the political elite.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 168-169). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>However, imprisonment does not seem to have interfered with Oniani’s ability to manage his criminal empire. A flow of visitors – and even Skype calls from his cell – seem to be allowing him to continue to set policy and visit vengeance upon his enemies. After all, his is a much more overtly hierarchical and rigidly and ruthlessly disciplined organisation than is the norm for larger criminal combines in Russia, essentially following the model of the ‘core group’. Oniani showed himself willing to allow many of his associates considerable autonomy, but he expected them to kick a share of their proceeds up to him. Ironically enough, this was often described as the obshchak, although what was once envisioned as a common kitty to help ordinary members in distress had become the boss’s personal slush fund.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 172). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>If Chechens and Georgians dominate the ‘highlander’ communities within the Russian underworld, it is important not to ignore other ethnicities such as the Armenians and Azeris. Armenian organised crime remains generally a low-level phenomenon in Russia and even such kingpins as the vor ‘Khromoi’, arrested in Moscow on drug charges in 2009, cooperate rather than compete with their Russian counterparts. This may help explain why Russian and Armenian criminals abroad also seem especially able and willing to work together. They have to, really: since the death of the senior Armenian gangster Rafik Bagdasaryan (‘Rafik Svo’) in 1993, they have never managed to maintain the kind of unity needed to be major players.34 Azeris, though, form a more distinct community, one which has been able to rely both on kinship ties and on its members’ ability to move back and forth between Russia and Azerbaijan, to avoid arrest and smuggle goods. Thus, in many cities from Moscow to Yekaterinburg to Vladivostok, relatively small but tightly knit Azeri communities spawned their own gangs.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 178). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The distinctiveness of the Georgians may reflect certain cultural characteristics but it was, ultimately, more than anything else the product of specific environmental factors: the strength of the local informal economy in Soviet times, the struggles for power in post-1991 Georgia, the expulsion of the vory, the characters of Oniani and Usoyan.39 It is therefore hard not to see the struggles between these models as a desperate and brutal last gasp before the ‘highlanders’ too are assimilated into the multi-ethnic, multi-commodity, crime–business–politics networks of the modern Eurasian underworld. Resistance is futile.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 180). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 12:
>The 1990s were times of hype and horror as ‘the Russian mafia’ – often regarded as a single, monolithic conspiracy – emerged as a suitable bugbear to replace the Soviet threat.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 181). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Mafias do not, on the whole, migrate. As Federico Varese has meticulously demonstrated in his Mafias on the Move, the myth of a globalised, universal criminal class able to migrate to wherever a new opportunity seems to be emerging is just that – a myth. Generally, when ‘mafiosi find themselves in the new locale [it is] not of their own volition; they have been forced to move there by court orders, to escape justice or mafia infighting and wars. They are not seeking new markets or new products but are instead just making the most of bad luck.’4 Even when they do move, the odds are they will fail in their efforts to establish their criminal enterprises in a new land, where they lack local contacts, often even the local language.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 182). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Organised crime from Russia is undoubtedly a significant feature of the global underworld, but usually in the form of facilitators rather than street-level thugs. These vory are the business partners of local groups: selling them heroin from Afghanistan, laundering their money through Russia’s still-murky financial system, providing weapons and occasionally someone who knows how to use them. In this way, even if the Russian mafiya (as it is sometimes called) is not a direct problem in a country, it can have a serious impact by providing existing gangs with access to expertise, services and criminal products to which normally they could never aspire.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 182-183). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>There is also the fundamental question of what is actually meant by ‘Russian organised crime’. This is an important point, as it is often crudely interpreted by analogy: parallels are drawn between the Russian gangs’ engagement with business and the Japanese yakuza’s, or between the rules of the vory and the Sicilian mafia’s code of silence. This even applies to law enforcers in Russia and, especially, beyond, who seek to force these criminal groupings into the traditional pyramidal model, with a godfather at the top, lieutenants beneath him, and footsoldiers at the base, simply because this is the kind of structure with which they are familiar and comfortable. From personal experience, I recall a painful afternoon spent with a team of smart, enthusiastic European police analysts in the late 2000s, who were trying to understand how a particular Russian group operated. Time and again, a pyramid would appear on the whiteboard, only to be erased as the complexities of this organisation’s structure and operations became clear. Eventually, one threw up his hands and said, ‘It’s not a gang, it’s a bunch of Facebook friends!’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 183-184). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>There is more than a little truth in this. Instead of the classic hierarchical gang, often drawn from a single ethnicity, home region or kin group, this is a flexible, networked criminal phenomenon that embraces a wide range of businesses (both licit and illicit), practices and even nationalities, but nonetheless has certain distinctive ways of operating. Indeed, ‘Russian organised crime’ may not necessarily be Russian, is often not especially organised, and does rather more than just crime.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 184). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The Russian-based networks are able to cherry-pick their opportunities, but still find it convenient to work with and through local criminals much of the time. It might be possible for the Russians to assume a more dominant role if they had to, but local gangs are typically keen to work with them, obviating the need.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 187). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>What all this reflected was a temporary advantage caused by the disproportion between the relative resources of the Russian and Eurasian gangs at the time and the local institutions, law enforcement structures and criminal rivals they were facing. In some ways, one could draw a parallel with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979: seizing the main cities and communications routes of this divided and impoverished country was no great feat. Actually holding and pacifying it would take greater political and military resources than the Soviets were able or willing to expend, especially as their very presence galvanised opposition. After ten years, the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan not because they had been beaten, but simply because the dwindling benefits of occupation were so clearly outweighed by its costs, and there was no prospect of victory on the horizon. This was defeat on the balance sheet rather than on the battlefield.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 188-189). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Furthermore, Russia’s criminals had particular reasons to want to internationalise their operations as quickly as possible. There was a pervasive (if misguided) belief that there could be a hard-line Communist revival or even some kind of nationalist–authoritarian coup. This helps explain the extreme measures taken – with Western acquiescence – to rig the 1996 presidential elections to ensure Boris Yeltsin beat his Communist rival.23 It also helps explain the gangsters’ enthusiasm for hedging themselves against trouble at home. By internationalising, they could secure revenue streams in alternative currencies (to protect them from the collapse of the ruble), prepare fall-back options if they were suddenly denied access to their main sources of income, and perhaps gain the right to live abroad through citizenship, investment or strategic marriage. That way, they could escape the Motherland if things suddenly began to look dangerous.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 189). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>When crime organisations do manage to expand, they tend not to move physically from their home base but instead establish local offshoots, especially within diaspora and migrant communities. They are a migratory resource, facilitating the inflow of criminals through invitation, work opportunity (real or otherwise) or even marriage (again, real or otherwise). They are a business resource, not least in brokering contacts for the gangsters. The largest concentration of Russians outside post-Soviet Eurasia is in the USA. According to the 2010 American Community Survey, there were then just under three million Americans identifying themselves as of Russian origin, although most are assimilated and speak no Russian. This is a granular diaspora, made up of different waves with their own defining characteristics. If one considers simply foreign-born native Russian speakers in the USA, a steadily growing cohort (up from just over 700,000 in 2000, according to the census, to over 850,000 in 200730), then New York remains a key centre for them, even if the appeal of Brighton Beach, their traditional haven, is becoming less marked than that of Manhattan and other parts of the city.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 192-193). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>After all, even if it does not constitute the merciless and irresistible conspiracy of alarmist myth, there is no doubt that Russian and Russian-linked organised crime can be found across the globe. It is defrauding millions out of the US Medicare and Medicaid programmes, swapping heroin for cocaine with Latin American drug gangs, laundering money around the Mediterranean, selling guns in Africa, trafficking women into the Middle East and raw materials into East Asia, and buying up real estate in Australia. Antarctica appears the only continent – so far – untouched. But the Russians are on the whole not trying to supplant or subjugate local gangs. If anything, the opposite is true. Although there are exceptions, in the main Russian networks do not just coexist with their local counterparts, they actively seek partnerships.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 195-196). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>A final characteristic is a particularly sharp awareness of the underworld and upperworld political contexts in which they operate. Their ability to prosper at home has, after all, been dependent upon these skills. Arguably, the failure of the first wave of overseas expansion was often precisely because the Russians did not adequately consider the bigger picture of how their intrusions into other countries would play with their rivals on the street and with the authorities. As a result, the Russian gangs abroad now tend to avoid overt displays of their criminal status, hiding behind indigenous allies, anonymous front corporations and legitimate Russian expat and business communities. They are also especially prone to seek to woo and buy local protectors within the political community.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 197-198). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>This certainly sounds fun, conjuring images of the SPECTRE organisation in James Bond films, of shadowy lords of the underworld meeting around a polished mahogany table, ideally in an extinct volcano. Sadly, or fortunately, it is far from the truth. Instead of some global criminal condominium, in the real world we see a global criminal marketplace. The very difficulty of expansion into new territories means that there is little incentive for major criminal combines to compete on anything but a local and specific level; at worst, they simply do not interact. Given that ‘Russian organised crime’ is no more monolithic than any other variety, particular local conflicts need not and generally do not interfere with other opportunities for mutually beneficial business.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 201). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
## Part 4 - Future:
### Chapter 13:
>So things are changing, little by little. There is a slow process taking place which is likely to see the country’s ‘exceptionality’ diminishing. The Russian underworld’s very distinctiveness reflected the unique circumstances in which it arose. As Russia acquires branches of HSBC and Starbucks, as Russians watch The Simpsons and The Sopranos, as Russians travel and study abroad, as their financial systems become more interconnected with others’ and as the legacies of Soviet rule recede, then bit by bit their criminals will likewise increasingly come to resemble ours. Globalisation will some day homogenise us all. According to Alimzhan ‘Taivanchik’ Tokhtakhounov, wanted in the USA on multiple warrants and accused of being a vor v zakone, the change has been dramatic: ‘There is no organised crime in Russia. None . . . There are hooligans, there are some lightweight bandits, there are drunks who come together to get up to something. But organised, concrete crime nowadays does not exist.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 208). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The ‘good old days’ always have a particular allure, but while today’s criminals may not have as formalised a code as the old vory, they do have their ‘understandings’, and their own folkways. If the successors to the vory truly had no code, it is hard to see how they could have done so well in such business sectors as protection, in which long-term efficiency is won through reliability and ‘brand name’ rather than muscle, or at least muscle alone.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 209). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>However, there is little evidence he truly intends – or at least, has so far intended – more than a public show of resolution and a periodic purge of officials sufficiently junior and far outside his personal circle to be disposable scapegoats. The relationship between the elite and the gangsters is not just one of buyer and bought, but typically of symbiosis or deeply rooted and mutually profitable relationships, which are often long term.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 210). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The modern Russian state is a much stronger force than in the 1990s, and jealous of its political authority. The gangs which prosper in modern Russia tend to do so by working with rather than against the state, and a new political generation has risen to power dependent for their futures on the Kremlin’s patronage rather than local underworld contacts. In this respect, if Russia is truly ruled by a ‘deep state’ – the term comes from the way Turkey for so long seemed to be run by an inner elite within an elite, controlling politics behind the scenes15 – then there are also ‘deep crime’ structures. An inventive study by Michael Rochlitz of the Higher School of Economics in Moscow, for example, found an apparently clear correlation between local government officials using illegal methods to take over businesses and their success in bringing out the vote for Putin.16 In other words, do well by the Kremlin, and the Kremlin will turn a blind eye. Connecting political figures, government officials, business leaders and criminal kingpins, these loose networks of patronage and mutual interest are very difficult to plot – Luzhkov’s alleged links, for example, are a matter of rumour and conjecture – but they undoubtedly exist and play a role in shaping Russian policy. But only when they remember that perennial truism: the state is the biggest gang in town.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 213). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>This does not make them convinced champions of the rule of law. They appreciate a degree of predictability within the system, as well as – now that they are rich – a state apparatus dedicated to preserving property rights. However, they are also well aware that an honest and well-functioning police force and a dedicated and incorruptible judiciary would be a serious threat to them. As a result, they have a strong interest in preserving the status quo and their ability to use violence or corruption as and when their circumstances dictate. This collective commitment to the status quo preserves their power, but it also sets rules and boundaries, as do the very economics of the market. Additionally, it means that when times get harder or when the legal institutions look less able to play their part, gangster habits can revive themselves.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 218). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Solonik knew full well what he was doing, but in modern Russia it is sometimes difficult even to know if you are working for the gangsters. The assassination of organised-crime boss Vasily Naumov in 1997 came as a particular embarrassment to the St Petersburg police when it emerged that his bodyguards were members of Saturn, one of their elite rapid-response squads, moonlighting and apparently engaged legitimately through a front company.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 220). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>That Russian organised crime has spawned such a complex service economy says much about its scale, sophistication and stability. In the process, the old vory v zakone are dying out, at least in their own terms. Once, if you wore a criminal tattoo to which they felt you were not entitled, you ran the risk of having that patch of skin forcibly removed with a knife – if you were lucky; now you just pay to get such a tattoo. As they made money and were freed from the shadow of the Gulag, the vory v zakone lost their old culture and cohesion. Crime once was something that defined people, that set them off from the rest of society. Now, it is just another route to power and prosperity.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 222). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 14:
>One could draw a parallel with Europe on the eve of the First World War. There are ambitious, rising powers with little stake in the status quo, eager to win their ‘place in the sun’; there are others desperate to maintain that status quo, but fearing a war that would be at best expensive, at worst ruinous. After all, some – let’s call them the Ottoman Empires of the underworld – now no longer have the practical strength to match their status and possessions. Meanwhile, international rivalries are sublimated and fought out by proxy in the imperial struggle for colonies. There are limits to the explanatory power of that analogy, but it is certainly the case that the current underworld status quo is under threat, in part because of revanchist or insurgent groups such as the late, unlamented Dzhaniyev’s, in part because of the imperial aspirations of figures such as Tariel Oniani, in part because once-mighty combines such as the Far Eastern Association of Thieves are in decline, and in part because of the scramble over new criminal opportunities.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 227). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The global financial crisis in 2008 had a serious impact on Russia, especially given the dependence of its economy on oil and gas exports.15 The ruble tumbled in value (despite the government burning through more than $130 billion of its foreign exchange reserves to prop it up) and real incomes fell almost 7 per cent in just twelve months. After years of impressive growth, Russia fell into recession, with serious impacts on the underworld. Many gangs suddenly found themselves in trouble: there was far less scope for protection racketeering and, as government contracts were suspended or scaled down, opportunities for embezzlement likewise declined. However, others benefited from the situation. Sometimes this was because their main assets were in foreign currencies (which now were worth more rubles) or they had control of still-valuable physical assets. At other times it was because their main businesses were suited to the new environment: dealing in counterfeit or smuggled goods, for example, as people looked to cheaper ways of maintaining their lifestyles, or loan-sharking. The result was a flurry of small-scale conflicts and consolidations. Some smaller gangs were forced to integrate into larger, more prosperous networks, often simply so that their chieftains could continue to afford to pay off the police and their own henchmen alike.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 228). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Some brothel keepers simply could not cope in these conditions, and their businesses folded. Those who survived, though, generally did so by diversifying into even more dangerous ventures, such as narcotics, and this in turn meant that they fell further into the control of organised crime. In many cases, they accumulated more debt. The local gangsters, themselves under pressure, often simply sold their debts on to the larger, richer gangs in the city, those whose activities were already sufficiently diversified that they could ride out the present storm.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 230). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>When the Kremlin slapped counter-sanctions on Western foodstuffs in 2014, consumers seeking their Italian salami and French cheeses had to turn to the black market, and Belarus became one of the key suppliers. Ironically, Moscow’s efforts to prevent such sanctions busting through the ‘grey market’ – legitimate companies trying to bypass the control regime – only handed a greater market share to the outright criminal smugglers, who had the years of experience and corrupt contacts to move shipments across the border. Lest this sound trivial, consider than a single ‘cheeserunner’ gang broken up in 2015 was accused of earning two billion roubles (some $34 million) in just six months.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 232). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>At home, the hackers generally appear not to be part of the existing criminal networks. Instead, much like professional assassins, forgers or money launderers, they are specialists for hire, engaged for a particular operation. More often, they form their own virtual groups and networks, increasingly cross-border and multi-ethnic ones, to commit crimes either for themselves or for hire to other gangs. They were, for example, reportedly the technical experts who cracked police databases for the Japanese yakuza in the 1990s,38 transferred stolen money abroad for Australian gangsters in the 2000s,39 and obtained credit card details for the Italians in the 2010s.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 236). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The state is once again the biggest gang in town, and local and national political/administrative figures are stronger than their criminal counterparts. However, it is not an especially unified ‘gang’ and as Putin’s grip on the elite appears to weaken, especially as speculation grows about a possible succession after the 2018 presidential elections, there are dangers. While the movers and shakers of central government have little reason to fear or need the criminals – even if they do often move within common social circles – at a local level, the opportunities for deeper cooperation nationally between political and criminal are much more evident and the relationship not quite so one sided. One by-product of this is that even if the national government does ever get serious about fighting corruption and organised crime, this may be resisted and side-lined on the ground by the gangsters’ allies, clients and patrons. Besides which, any conflict will undermine a central element of President Putin’s legitimating mythology: that he was the one man who could finally restore order to Russia.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 239). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 15:
>Russia’s organised crime has played an important role in the opening hostilities of what has been called the ‘new Cold War’ – or the ‘Hot Peace’5 – that truly took shape in 2014 with the seizure of Crimea. All intelligence services sometimes make use of criminals (the mafia helped open doors for US agents in Sicily in the Second World War, for instance, although the extent to which they did this has been overstated6). However, when intelligence agencies work with or through criminals, they typically seek to maintain clear boundaries (ideally the gangsters should never know with whom they may be working). In the Russian case, these boundaries are too often blurred, permeable – and often the vory turn out to be the ultimate beneficiaries.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 241-242). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Clearly, the presence of Russian and Eurasian organised crime has subtle, as well as obvious effects. Europol’s 2008 Russian Organised Crime Assessment, for example, concluded that it had a ‘medium level direct impact’ on the European Union, mainly felt through their trafficking operations, but a: high level indirect impact on the EU. This is experienced through money laundering and investments. These activities distort and may even destroy legal competition; raise prices and inflation in the property and other similar markets; increase corruption of business practices and culture; create concrete losses to legal business and national economies in the EU; increase the lucrativeness and social acceptance of criminal activities; facilitate OC-penetration and integration into legal structures; legalise the proceeds of crime, the criminals and their activities and in turn also seriously damage many legal elements of the EU societies.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (pp. 242-243). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Perverse incentives are the bane of many a seemingly well-thought-through plan. If Moscow is offering to replace your car any time it gets stolen or written off, then why bother driving safely or locking it at night? Indeed, why not say it was stolen and sell it on? Sadly, the same is true when applied to munitions promised to militia groups in the Donbas region of south-eastern Ukraine. Recruit criminals and adventurers, arm them, put them in a messy, fluid conflict sitting across established smuggling routes, and pledge to make good on expenditures in battle, and one should hardly be surprised when skirmishes against Ukrainian government forces are started for no reason beyond providing an excuse to burn off, say, 10,000 rounds of ammunition, while claiming to have used twice as much. When the replacement 20,000 rounds appear from depots deeper in the Donbas, the excess can neatly be dumped onto the black market for a profit.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 247). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>For the vory, this was a priceless opportunity to turn their street muscle into a form of legal power. Although post-Soviet Ukraine had had at best partial success in building a working law-based state (if anything, by 2014 corruption was an even greater problem there than in Russia29), the east had been especially problematic, in the grip of a seemingly unbreakable cabal of business oligarchs and corrupt political managers. In short, ‘Donbas’s magnates – some criminals already under Soviet law – prevented the rule of law from emerging in the Donbas and severely limited the formation of a civil society’.30 Combine that with a heavy concentration of local prisons, and a faltering local economy that encouraged street gangs, and it is perhaps no surprise that it was commonly said that ‘every third man in the Donetsk region is in prison, has been in prison, or will be in prison’.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 248). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The rebels certainly can create, and have created, chaos, and as of writing in 2017 no end to this miserable conflict seems in sight. But then, when it comes to ‘weaponisation’, chaos is easier to generate than control. Several commanders have been assassinated, probably by Russian special forces precisely because they became too wilful and too dangerous. Much of the smaller-scale fighting appears uncontrolled, as often as not triggered by boredom or the opportunity to make money. Meanwhile, Rostov-on-Don has seen its murder rate soar (up 19 per cent in 2016) and the supply of illegal weapons expand dramatically as Kalashnikovs and even heavier weapons trickle back onto the Russian black market.36 Whether or not the Kremlin considers all this to be a success, there is little question that the Donbas is a criminal war, and not just in terms of international law.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 249). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Now, it is hardly the case that all Russian criminal operations are instruments of Kremlin influence abroad. Not every group or network can be induced to become part of what one could call Moscow’s ‘Crimintern’, its underworld successor to the old Soviet Communist International. Those which can I have defined as ‘Russian-based organised crime’ (RBOC): the crucial feature is that, while operating abroad, they retain a strong stake in Russia. Maybe it means their members still have family there, or assets, or that the core of their network is in Russia. Either way, it means the Kremlin has leverage. As a Western counter-intelligence officer inelegantly but evocatively put it to me about one RBOC vor, ‘so long as his balls were in Moscow, the Russians could always squeeze’.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 250). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 
### Chapter 16:
>In 1999, though, Vladimir Putin memorably said of Chechen terrorists, ‘If we find them in the toilet, we’ll whack them, even in the outhouse.’ He used the word mochit, which literally means ‘to wet’, and comes from criminal slang recorded as far back as the 1920s. In a term that ended up being adopted even by the KGB political police, mokroye delo, a ‘wet job’, was a killing, wet because blood was shed. When Putin – at the time still prime minister, but President Boris Yeltsin’s heir apparent – used a term like this, it not only consolidated his status as a leader with a touch of the bad-boy street hoodlum, it also sanctioned the spread of such language throughout official society.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 255). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Mainstream society has adopted criminal slang not just because it was exciting to break such taboos after years of stultifying and po-faced Soviet jargon, nor yet simply to follow Putin’s example. It also reflected a fundamental process of criminalisation of politics and daily life, a way of describing the byt, the experiences of the day to day, communicating a world in which clan loyalty, ruthless competition and naked exploitation were the order of the day.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 256). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>As the Russian underworld loses its old myths and codes, as the title of vor v zakone becomes commodified and turned into an empty vanity, as the senior criminals set up corporations and charities and seek to blend into mainstream society, and as politicians start talking like gangsters, who is taming and teaching whom? Somewhere around the turn of the twenty-first century, state-building thieves and criminalised statesmen met in the middle. The Russian-American journalist Paul Klebnikov – himself killed in a mob hit in Moscow in 2004 – quoted Konstantin Borovoi, chair of the Russian Commodity Exchange, as saying, ‘The mafia is an attempt to imitate the government. It has its own tax system, its own security service, and its own administrative system. Any entrepreneur, in addition to paying taxes to the government, has to pay taxes to this shadow government.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 257). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>The result was the popular russky shanson musical genre (a term only apparently coined in the 1980s), frequently cloyingly romantic, sometimes shockingly dark, but often referencing criminal and prison experiences or using the language of the underworld. Back in Soviet times, the milder forms which avoided overtly criminal or rebellious themes – often called dvorovye romansy, ‘courtyard romances’ – were tolerated, while true blatnye pesny survived outside the official media. Since then, though, both have thrived – anyone who has taken a gypsy cab in Moscow has probably heard a radio tuned to Radio Shanson – and spawned a whole array of subgenres. There is the jollier vein of ballads about dumb cops and cunning robbers, often set in – where else? – Odessa; there are plaintive tales of love lost through imprisonment and dreams of return; there are gritty accounts of scores settled and traitors executed.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 265). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Since the chaos of the 1990s, there has been a distinct change, especially amongst the new generation of younger police officer. It is not that corruption has become anathema. Indeed, if anything my unscientific sense tallies with the rather more methodologically robust analysis by Alexis Belianin and Leonid Kosals of Moscow’s Higher School of Economics that finds there is a strong commitment to retaining a degree of corruption.42 Rather, there has been a distinct shift in the limits of ‘acceptable corruption’. One officer rationalised it in terms of substitution: ‘If the guy would anyway get a fine, then why not take a bribe to let him go? He’s still out of pocket, and anyway, he’d probably just bribe the judge or prosecutor instead. But he still pays for his crime.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 268). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>Ultimately, though, the Russian people are the first and worst victims of today’s iteration of the vorovskoi mir and it will be for them to tame it, as eventually I believe they will. There is always the Orientalising temptation to somehow suggest that certain peoples, from Italians to Russians, are naturally prone to corruption and gangsterism.

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 272). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 

>In 1993, I briefly reconnected with Vadim, the police officer. As one of the OMON special police, he and his team were increasingly often being sent in to arrest gangsters and break up armed incidents. They had been issued heavy, uncomfortable, old-fashioned, army-surplus body armour that no one really trusted. They were using a battered old UAZ van that needed to be jump-started on a cold morning, and often had no more than a quarter of a tank of petrol. They were risking their lives, while being paid the same as the women who sat in booths at the base of the long escalators in the metro stations, watching that no one fell, and occasionally shouting at people to stay in line. He had acquired a one-year-old child, a scar from a ricochet and quite a drinking habit. And yet for all that he was unconscionably, unreasonably, unfathomably optimistic. ‘These are mad times,’ he admitted, ‘but they won’t last. We’ll survive. We will learn how to be European, how to be civilised. It just may take a while.’

Galeotti, Mark. The Vory: Russia's Super Mafia (p. 272). Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 